Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60)
Divine Discourses of Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai BabaIndex Of Discourses
1.   Have You Heard Our Baba Speak? ....................................................................... 2
1.   Worship In The Mind .............................................................................................. 7
2.   Total Surrender ...................................................................................................... 13
3.   God As Guide ......................................................................................................... 20
4.   Divine Life .............................................................................................................. 25
5.   Meditation On The Lord's Name And Form ...................................................... 27
6.   An Attitude Of Challenge ...................................................................................... 33
7.   Courage ................................................................................................................... 38
8.   Many Roads ............................................................................................................ 41
9.   Examine, Experience ............................................................................................. 46
10. Discrimination And Detachment .......................................................................... 50
11. Man And God: Nara And Narayana .................................................................... 52
12. Tolerance ................................................................................................................ 58
13. Bliss Through Dedication ...................................................................................... 61
14. The Wise Farmer ................................................................................................... 66
15. Be Heroes, Not Zeros ............................................................................................. 71
16. Training .................................................................................................................. 75
17. Qualities And Money ............................................................................................. 81
18. Education And Peace ............................................................................................. 85
19. The Moon And The Mind ..................................................................................... 89
20. Neither Scriptures Nor Logic ................................................................................ 95
21. The Insentient And The Supreme Consciousness .............................................. 100
22. The Screen Within ............................................................................................... 107
23. The Temple ........................................................................................................... 112
24. Many-pointedness And One-pointedness .......................................................... 116
25. Man And Mind ..................................................................................................... 121
26. The World, My Mansion ..................................................................................... 126
27. The Underlying Truths ........................................................................................ 130
28. The Best Tonic ...................................................................................................... 135
29. Sathya Sai Gita (i) ................................................................................................ 139
30. Sathya Sai Gita (ii) ............................................................................................... 145
31. Sathya Sai Gita (iii) .............................................................................................. 151
32. Sathya Sai Gita (iv) .............................................................................................. 155
33. Foundation For Education .................................................................................. 161
34. The Click of the Camera ..................................................................................... 165
35. The Dangers of Doubt .......................................................................................... 171
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 1Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 1 - Have You Heard Our Baba Speak?
 1. Have You Heard Our Baba Speak?
Date: 16 October 1958  / Location:  Prasanthi Nilayam  / Occasion:  Dasara, Vijayadasami
 
Poem read by Prof. N. Kasturi in the Divine Presence on 16th October 1958. 
 Have you heard our Baba speak
At public meetings anywhere?
He never calls it speech,
Nor will you name it so!
He does not raise His voice, harangue,
Or rouse the mob or rail or flail;
He does not hesitate, He will not calculate,
Hum and haw and pause and ponder,
Making you wonder why you came!
He does not waver, wander,
Collecting thoughts, contriving notes;
He does not waste a moment, decorating thoughts
In showy lace and frills, clothing borrowed texts
In shimmering gauze.
He is no orator-pompous, proud,
Clamouring for claps, publicity-mad!
He will not circumambulate, declaim … or even ... 'speak'!
He is the Rain-cloud, bringing Life
To the parched ones here below!
He 'talks' ...... He 'talks', to you, and you,
And every single you that has gathered there.
To every single Arjuna, with heavy heart and empty hand,
Afraid to fight the battle of Life on to Victory.
You feel He has come for you, to you.
You see Him, silently looking around!
The searchlight eye full circle swings!
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 2Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 1 - Have You Heard Our Baba Speak?
 How lucky, you are there!
He smiles; He wins you by that smile!
You scarce can take your eyes from off that Face,
So alluring, so Divine!
You scarce can pull your heart from off His grip;
The clasp is cool comfort!
The silence deepens ...
Though thousands have been squatting, waiting,
For hours and hours ...
Himalayan stillness; twilight calm!
 Premaswarupulara!
The Golden Hour has come!
Heaven's Gate ajar!
This voice is sweet as honey
Hived by Heavenly bees from Parijatha trees!
His call is clarion clear!
O! 'Tis thrilling, 'tis filling rapture in the soul,
Flowing like the Ganga, freeing the bound,
Yielding rich reaping, for just ploughing and sowing
Welling and swelling like Gersoppa Falls,
Yielding vast power, for just wheeling and wiring!
His talk is a cascade, so limpid and pure,
Teaching, never preaching, unravelling all knots,
Stilling the questionings ere they emerge in mind;
Defining, refining, consoling the pining,
Commanding, yea, demanding the bending of pride,
Sparing no one, be he ruling or serving.
Chiding, reprimanding the fool, and fanatic;
Joking and coaxing, poking fun at all hoaxing;
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 3Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 1 - Have You Heard Our Baba Speak?
 Quoting from what He said in the past ages,
Detailing facts of His incarnating.
Resplendent poetry, spontaneous, sublime,
Painting pictures of transcendent Truth,
Parable, proverb, scintillating bright,
Tinkling, twinkling, tintinnabulating lilt,
Every hour a minute, every minute a second;
Every word a mantra, every phrase, sutra,
A Gayatri a sentence, Upanishad a speech!
For He is no well or tank or river!
His is the ocean of Wisdom Divine!
Oh! His words shower mercy, like morning dew
On every heart-bud awakening from dreaming.
He is feeding your roots and speeding the sap,
Sprouting the buds, painting the petals,
Perfuming them well, inviting the bees,
Ripening the pods, with each word of His!
There! The meaning of His word, a tiny seed
Drops on your rock-like heart! And wonder of wonders!
It germinates there! ... sprouts and puts forth leaves!
The silken half-blind baby-roots do run about
Tickling the stone, jabbing, pleading for suckling!
Succeeding at last, it grows; and, growing into a tree,
Your rock is broken into clay!
His talk, you will find, is cooling, not freezing
Warming, not burning; raining, not flooding;
Healing the ailing and hearts bewailing;
Soothing, not searing; no toxin, but tonic;
Balming and calming; all fact and no fiction!
Every sentence spreads joy and scorches gloom,
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 4Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 1 - Have You Heard Our Baba Speak?
 Impelling attention, compelling assent,
Dispelling dejection, repelling sloth,
Attracting you nearer, detaching from bonds,
Infusing courage, and fusing creeds,
Imposing no doctrine, composing all feuds,
Informing (so charming!), never harming, disarming!
Sifting the responding, lifting the desponding.
Stressing on 'Doing, Behaving and Living',
Appealing for 'Feeling, Believing and Acting'.
Calling all listening, to spurn imitating,
Vainly disputing, blind leading the blind,
Knocking at Paradise through power and pelf,
Or boasting of branches of family tree,
And seeking for peace, in earning and spending
And wanting and panting and hoarding and guarding.
As you hear Him talking, you quietly resolve
To take a step forward on the pilgrim road;
Unfold your wings and soar into the sky!
You feel you are a Lion, cheated into bleating!
A diamond, set in dirty lead!
Engaging in no fray, enraging no foe,
He is welcoming all, who are thirsty or starving,
Or limping, or blinking, or climbing and sliding,
Raising the stooping, embracing the drooping
Assuaging pain, assuring His Grace.
He reminds us all of the road we have missed.
He describes the joy of the journey's end.
He opens our eyes; He strengthens our limbs;
He heartens the struggling, groping his way,
Awakening the sleeping, making the sitting stand,
The standing to walk; the walking to reach!
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 5Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 1 - Have You Heard Our Baba Speak?
 Proclaiming, revealing, announcing to all
Asserting His coming for our burden assuming,
Redeeming the wayward, the downcast, diseased;
Underlining the Truth, undermining the false;
Ah! What is this? What luck! What Grace!
Even as He talks, 'it' blossoms into song,
Oh! Captivating Song! He teaches us to pray
Tranquilising all the furious waves,
Steeling the nerves and strengthening the will,
Attuning our soul to Dharma! Sathya! Prema!
And when it stops
And you open your eyes, You find them full of tears!
Your neighbour weeps like child for mother,
But Why? Look up and see; He has left the dais!
Be proud you had the chance.
From this moment, I know
You are bound to be an ascending, attempting, adventurous soul.
Arjuna, resuming arms for the fray
With Krishna leading the horses aright -
How lucky you heard Him talk!
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 6Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 1 - Worship In The Mind
 1. Worship In The Mind
Date: 17 October 1953  / Location:  Prasanthi Nilayam  / Occasion:  Dasara, Vijayadasami
 
When I was at Uravakonda studying in the high school, you know I came away
one day and threw off my books and declared that I have My work waiting for
Me. The Telugu scholar described the incident of that evening to you all in his
speech. Well, that day when I came out publicly as Sai Baba, that first song I
taught the gathering in the garden to which I went from the Telugu pandit's
house was: 
Manasa bhajare guru charanam
Dustara bhava sagara taranam
I called on all those suffering in the endless round of birth and death to
worship the Feet of the Guru (spiritual preceptor), the Guru who was
announcing Himself, who had come again for taking upon Himself the burden
of those who find refuge in Him. That was the very first Message of Mine to
Humanity. Manasa bhajare - Worship in the mind! I do not need your flower
garlands and fruits, things that you get for an anna or two; they are not
genuinely yours. Give Me something that is yours, something that is clean
and fragrant with the perfume of virtue and innocence and washed in the
tears of repentance! Garlands and fruits you bring as items in the show, as an
exhibition of your devotion; poorer devotees who cannot afford to bring them
are humiliated and feel sorry that they are helpless; they cannot demonstrate
their devotion in the grand way in which you are doing it. Install the Lord in
your heart and offer Him the fruits of your actions and the flowers of your
inner thoughts and feelings. That is the worship I like most, the devotion I
appreciate most.  
  Re-education of man persists in all eras 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 7Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 1 - Worship In The Mind
 In shops, things are kept in separate packets, and each one specialises in
some particular article or sets of articles. But in an exhibition, hundreds of
shops join to make all varieties of things available, and there is a great deal of
window-dressing, arrangement, and display. I have been all these days
generally giving individual advice, like the packets available in shops, and
giving answers to individual questions. This 'speech' today is a new
experience for you. I am addressing a gathering today, but even though it
may be new to you, for Me it is not new. I have given advice to large
gatherings before, though not in this Appearance. Whenever the Formless
becomes One with Form, It has to fulfil the Mission, and It does so in various
ways. But the one purpose, the re-education of Man, persists, whatever the
era. The first sixteen years of this Life have been, as I have often told you, the
period when divine child sport predominated, and the next sixteen is being
spent mostly in miracles in order to give joy to this generation. Joy and
contentment are short-lived sensations; you have to catch that mood and
make it a permanent possession: bliss ( ananda ). After the thirty-second year,
you will see Me active more and more in the task of spiritual instruction -
teaching erring humanity and in directing the world along the path of truth,
righteousness, peace, and love ( sathya , dharma , santhi , and prema ). Not that
I am determined to exclude plays and miracles from My activity after that. I
only mean that reestablishing dharma, correcting the crookedness of the
human mind, and guiding humanity back to Sanathana Dharma (Eternal
Universal Religion) will be My task thereafter. Do not be led away by doubt
and vain argument; do not question how and whether I can do all this. The
cowherds of Brindavan also doubted whether the little boy (Krishna) who
grew in their midst could lift Govardana mountain and hold it aloft! The thing
needed is faith, and yet more faith. 
  Secret of spiritual success 
Once Krishna and Arjuna were going together along the open road. Seeing a
bird in the sky, Krishna asked Arjuna, "Is that a dove?" He replied, "Yes, it is a
dove." He asked Arjuna, "Is it an eagle?' Arjuna replied promptly, "Yes, it is an
eagle." "No, Arjuna, it looks like a crow to Me. Is it not a crow?" asked Krishna.
Arjuna replied, "I am sorry, it is a crow beyond a doubt." 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 8Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 1 - Worship In The Mind
 Krishna laughed and chided him for agreeing to whatever suggestion was
given. But Arjuna said, "For me, Your Words are far more weighty than the
evidence of my eyes; You can make it a crow, a dove, or an eagle, and when
you say it is a crow, it must be one." 
Implicit faith is the secret of spiritual success. The Lord loves not the devotee
but his devotion, remember. The Lord's Grace is like rain, pure water, falling
equally everywhere; but its taste gets changed according to the soil through
which it flows. So also the Lord's words are sweet to some, bitter to others.
The Lord's ways are mysterious; He blessed Vidura with the words, "Be
destroyed" and Dussasana with the words, "Live for a thousand years;" He
meant that Vidura's 'I' will be destroyed and that the wicked Dussasana would
have to suffer the ills and tribulations of this world for ten centuries. 
You do not know the real reasons behind the actions of the Lord. You cannot
understand the motives of other men who are almost like you in everything,
actuated by the same motives and having the same likes and dislikes! But
yet, how easily you discover the motives of One who is far, far above the level
of humanity! How glibly you talk and judge something that is as strange to
you as atmosphere to a fish! 
  Pains indicate birth of new life 
There are four types of persons; the 'dead', who deny the Lord and declare
that they alone exist, independent, free, self-regulating, and self-directed; the
'sick', who call upon the Lord when some calamity befalls them or when they
feel temporarily deserted by the usual sources of succour; the 'dull', who
know that God is the eternal companion and watchman, but who remember it
only off and on when the idea is potent and powerful; and lastly, the 'healthy',
who have steady faith in the Lord and who live in His comforting creative
presence always. You proceed from 'death' to 'life' and from 'illness' to
'health' by the experience of the buffeting of the world. The world is a very
essential part of the curriculum of man; through the agony of search is born
the infant, wisdom. The pains are worthwhile; they indicate the birth of new
life. From asanthi (restlessness) you get prasanthi (absolute peace), from
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 9Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 1 - Worship In The Mind
 prasanthi to prakanthi (bright spiritual illumination), and from prakanthi to
Paramjyothi (Supreme Divine Radiance). It is like the alternating of night and
day, this recurrence of joy and grief. Night and day are twin sisters; both are
necessary to increase the fertility of the soil, to activate and refresh life. They
are like summer and winter. There are some who ask Me, "Baba! Make this
summer less hot!" But in the heat of summer the Earth takes in the needed
energy from the Sun, so that when the rains come, she may yield a plentiful
harvest. 
  Shine forth in your real nature 
'Cold' and 'heat' are both in the Plan of God, and yours is only to know this
and treat both as valuable. Thorny plants and thornless plants are both there
in nature; the wise man knows the value of both. He plants the thornless one
and surrounds it with the thorny ones, so that what he fosters is left
unharmed. Activity can save, as well as kill; it is like the cat that bites; it bites
the kitten in order to carry it in its mouth to a place of safety; it bites the rat
in order to kill and eat. Become the kitten, and work will rescue you like a
loving Mother. Become a rat, and you are lost. God draws the Individual
toward itself; it is the nature of both to have this affinity, for they are the
same. They are like the iron and the magnet. But if the iron is rusty or
covered with layers of dirt, the magnet is unable to attract. Remove the
impediment; that is all you have to do. Shine forth in your real nature, and the
Lord will draw you into His Bosom. Trials and tribulations are the means by
which this cleansing is done. That is why Kunthi prayed to Krishna, "Give us
always grief, so that we may never forget Thee." They are like the dietary and
other restrictions that the doctor prescribes to supplement the effect of the
drug of remembrance of God ( namasmarana ). 
  Do not give up spiritual practice 
Sai is beloved to all people, so you can take up any name that gives you joy.
Tastes differ according to the temperament and character one has earned by
generations of activity as a living being in this world. The proprietor of a
coffee house goes to the nearby druggist for a pill to ward off his headache,
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 10Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 1 - Worship In The Mind
 and the druggist, when he gets a headache, goes to the coffee house for a
cup of coffee, which he thinks will cure him. Men are like that: the tastes of
people differ. The wise one says, 
 
Sarvam Brahma Mayam
In God is All
Another, a yogi, says all is energy; a third, who is a devotee, says all is the
play of Bhagavan (the Lord). Each according to their taste and according to
their progress in spiritual practice. Do not hurry or ridicule them, for they are
all pilgrims trudging along the same road. Spiritual exercise is most required
to control the mind and the desires after which it runs. If you find that you are
not able to succeed, do not give up the spiritual exercise but do it more
vigorously, for it is the subject in which you did not get passing marks that
requires special study, is it not? Spiritual exercise means inner cleanliness as
well as external cleanliness. You do not feel refreshed if you wear unwashed
clothes after your bath, do you? Nor do you feel refreshed if you wear washed
clothes but skip the bath. Both are needed, the external as well as the
internal (the bahya and the bhava ). Children believe your words when you
say that the policeman will catch them or the ghost will beat them. They are
full of fear, fortitude, and faith! But having grown old and stuffed your heads
with all kinds of doctrines and dogmas and theories and arguments, you have
now to use your discrimination and discover God the hard way. This I will tell
you, there is no escaping it; all creatures have to reach God some day or
other, by the long route or by the short route. 
 
One wish leads to another; one bond brings about ten others. It is in the very
nature of human desire, for the joy one gets through its satisfaction is
imperfect, limited, temporary, pregnant with grief. You sow bitter seeds and
pray for a harvest of sweetness. You wail over the soil, the plant, the rain.
What can they do? The seeds themselves are diseased, defective. 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 11Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 1 - Worship In The Mind
 
- Sri Sathya Sai Baba
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 12Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 2 - Total Surrender
 2. Total Surrender
Date: 20 February 1955  / Location:  Prasanthi Nilayam  / Occasion:  Shivarathri
 
I do not give 'speeches'; My talks are more of the conversation type. I want
that you should follow every word of what I say with reverent attention, for
your joy is My food. You can get joy ( anandam ) only by following the advice I
give you, and this is why I am particular that you should listen carefully and
take to heart all that I say. This is not a mere lecture, wherefrom you do not
seek new lessons for life. The Lord is a Mountain of Prema (Love); any number
of ants carrying away particles of sweetness cannot exhaust His Plenty. He is
an Ocean of Mercy without a limiting shore. Devotion is the easiest way to win
His Grace and also to realise that He pervades everything - in fact, is
everything!
Total surrender, leaving everything to His Will, is the highest form of devotion.
Once a brahmin was crossing a river bed near which some men were washing
clothes. Finding a nice new silk shawl on his shoulder, they fell upon him in a
group, shouting that it belonged to the palace and had been given to them to
be washed but had been stolen and had not been traced. The poor
brahmin yelled "Narayana, Narayana," when the blows rained on him, so
Narayana rose from His Seat in Vaikunta and proceeded forward; but in a
moment, He walked back and resumed His Seat, much to the surprise of His
Consort who asked Him the reason for the strange behaviour. Narayana said,
"I wanted to help that poor brahmin , who has fallen into a den of scoundrels,
but he started beating them, blow for blow; My Help is no longer needed."
 Conquest of ego needed
When devotion is just emerging as a sapling, a fence is needed to protect the
tender plant; that fence is Sanathana Dharma (Eternal Religion) and its rules,
regulations and restrictions, directions and commands. When the fruit is
green, it will not fall even when the gale is furious; but when it is fully ripe, it
drops to the ground even in the silence of the night. A small fire will go out in
smoke if even a little green is placed on it, but the forest fire will reduce to
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 13Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 2 - Total Surrender
 ashes even the greenest tree that impedes its fierce march! What is needed
is the conquest of the ego. The bullock shouts " ham hai, ham hai (I am, I
am)", in its egoistic pride. So, when it is just a few days old, you tie it to a
post, apart from its mother; you work it to skin and bones; but yet, the animal
does not learn the lesson of humility. Even its skin, when drawn tightly across
a drum, resounds egoistically, " Ham Ham Ham ". So the skin has to be cut into
slender strings and then when the strings are pulled, the bullock reveals that
it has benefitted by all the punishment it has undergone; it murmurs thum
thum thum (you you you), and its ego is gone. The mendicant goes along the
streets, singing the glories of the Lord. He has the sounding cymbals, two of
them, the eternal duet of good-bad, joy-grief, pain-pleasure in his right hand,
and he twangs the tambura (a stringed musical instrument) of worldly life
with his left. Worldly life is the tune to which his songs have to be adjusted, it
is the musical note. But both the tune and beat are for the purpose of
heightening the effect of the song, which issues from his mouth, the song of
the glory of God.
 Three types of devotion
I remember telling a questioner in Maharashtra, while in the previous Body,
that there are three types of devotion:
1.The bird method where, like a bird swooping down upon the ripe fruit
on the tree, the devotee is too impatient and, by that very impatience,
loses the fruit, which falls from his hold.
2.The monkey method where, like a monkey that pulls toward it one fruit
after another and by sheer unsteadiness is not able to decide which
fruit it wants, the devotee hesitates and changes his aim much too
often and thus loses all chances of success.
3.The ant method, where like the ant that slowly but steadily proceeds
toward the sweetness, the devotee moves direct, with undivided
attention, toward the Lord and wins His Grace!
Devotion and faith are the two oars with which you can take the boat across
the sea of worldly life. A child told its mother when it went to bed at night,
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 14Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 2 - Total Surrender
 "Mother! Wake me up when I get hungry." The mother answered, "There is no
need, your hunger will itself wake you." So too, when the hunger for God
comes, it will itself activise you and make you seek the food you need. God
has endowed you with hunger and He supplies the food; He has endowed you
with illness and He grows the specifics you need. Your duty is to see that you
get the proper hunger and the right illness and use the appropriate food or
drug! Man must be yoked to the worldly life and broken; that is the training
that will teach that the world is unreal; no amount of lectures will make you
believe it is a snake unless you actually experience it. Touch fire and get the
sensation of burning; there is nothing like it to teach you that fire is to be
avoided. Unless you touch it, you will be aware only of its light. It is light and
heat both; just as this world is both true and false, that is to say, unreal.
 Habit of judging others as atheists or theists
There is a widely prevalent habit now of judging others and labeling them as
theists or atheists. What do you know, what can you know, of the inner
working of another's mind? There was once a queen who was a great devotee
of Rama. She felt so sad that her husband, the Raja, never even uttered the
name of Rama and had no devotion. She had vowed that on the first occasion
on which she got evidence of his devotion, or at least respect for repeating
Rama's name, she would conduct ritualistic worship in all the temples and
feed the poor on a lavish scale. Then, one night, while fast asleep, the Raja
uttered Rama's name thrice plaintively and prayerfully. She heard this
repetition of the Name and was happy at the discovery of her husband's
devotion to Rama. She ordered general rejoicing throughout the kingdom and
the feeding of the poor. The Raja did not know the reason for the celebration,
for he was told only that it was an order of his wife, which the officers carried
out. Similarly, a husband may not be aware of the excellence of a wife's
spiritual attainments. There is the case of a couple who were proceeding
through a thick jungle on pilgrimage to an inaccessible shrine. The husband
saw on the foot path a precious stone, shining brilliantly when the sun's rays
fell upon it from between the leaves. He hastily threw some sand over it with
a movement of his foot so that his wife may not be tempted to pick it up and
become a slave to the tinsel. The wife saw the gesture and chided the
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 15Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 2 - Total Surrender
 husband for still retaining in his mind a distinction between sand and
diamond. For her, both were the same.
 Keep the Name as constant as breathing
The Raja who spoke the sacred name of Rama in his sleep felt very sorry,
according to the story, that he let Rama's name out of his mouth, for he
believed that no one should know of his 'love' for Rama. There are many who
will not shout about their guru or their favourite Name and Form, but whether
you declare them to others or not, keep them ever in your consciousness.
Repetition of Rama or any other name must be as constant as
breathing. For this, practice is essential. A person once told Dr. Johnson, the
famous English thinker, that he could seldom get time to recite the Name of
God, what with the hundreds of things he had to do from morning till nightfall
and even far into the night. Dr. Johnson replied with another question. He
asked how millions of people found space to live upon the face of the earth,
which is two-thirds water and the rest is too full of mountains, deserts,
forests, icy regions, river beds, marshes, and similar impossible areas. The
questioner said that man somehow struggled to find living space. So too, said
Dr. Johnson, man must somehow find a few minutes a day for prayer to the
Lord.
 Example of the highest type of detachment
Devotion and the attitude of surrender that is its final fruits will give you great
courage to meet any emergency. Such courage is what is called renunciation.
The story of Mohajith, a prince, is a good example of this highest type of
detachment. Mohajith went to a sage in the forest and sought guidance in the
spiritual path. The sage asked him whether he had conquered attachment, as
his name indicated. The prince said that not only he but everyone in his
kingdom had! So the sage started to test the truth of this claim. The sage
took the prince's robes, soaked them in blood, and hastened to the palace
gate with the gruesome story of the murder of the prince by some ruffians in
the jungle. The maid whom he met refused to hurry with the news to the royal
apartments because she said, "He was born, and he died; what is the special
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 16Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 2 - Total Surrender
 urgency of this news that I should interrupt my regular routine and run to the
king and queen?" When at last he got an audience and was able to
communicate the sad news to the prince's father, the king, who sat unruffled,
whispering to himself, "The bird flew off the tree on which it had alighted to
take rest." The queen too was unmoved. She told the sage that this Earth is a
caravanserai, where men come and stay for the night and when dawn breaks,
one by one, they tramp their different ways. Kith and kin are the words we
use for attachment to the travelers cultivated in the caravanserai during the
short term of acquaintance. The wife of the "dead" prince was also
unaffected. She said, "Husband and wife are like two pieces of wood drifting
down a flooded river; they float near each other for some time and when
some current comes between, they are parted. Each must move on to the sea
at its own rate and in its own time. There is no need to grieve over the parting
of the two; it is in the very nature of nature that it should be so." The sage
was overjoyed to see this steady and sincere dispassion in the rulers and the
ruled. He came back to the forest and told the prince that, while he was away,
a hostile army had invaded his kingdom and slain the entire royal family and
captured his kingdom and enslaved his subjects. The prince took the news
calmly and said, "All this is bubble, impermanent, flimsy. Let it go the way of
the bubble. Guide me to reach the Infinite, the Imperishable."
 Grow with self-respect and dignity
Such courage comes out of the Grace of the Lord; it needs generations of
learning and struggle. Meanwhile, you must start with the first step, the
cleansing of the mind and the cultivation of virtue. Even if you do not start
with that step, at least do not laugh at those who do and discourage them. Do
at least this much! Then, do not depend upon others for doing your work, like
attending to your personal wants. Do them yourself; that is real freedom.
Again, never accept anything 'free' from others; pay it back, in service or
work. That will make you self-respecting individuals. Receiving a favour
means getting bound to the giver. Grow with self-respect and dignity. That is
the best service you can do to yourself.
 There is no seniority or juniority among devotees
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 17Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 2 - Total Surrender
 'Uncle' Moon is 'uncle' to all the children of the world. So also, the Lord is
everyone's Father, in whose property everyone can claim a share. But in
order to get it, you must reach a certain age, a certain standard of
intelligence and discrimination. The infirm and the idiotic, He will not consider
fit to receive property. His property is Grace, Love ( Prema ). But if you have
discrimination and renunciation, you can claim your share, as of right. Bring
devotion and lay it here and take from here spiritual strength! The more such
business is done, the more pleased am I. Bring what you have, namely, your
sorrows and griefs, worries, and anxieties, and take from Me joy and peace,
courage and confidence. In My view, there is no seniority or juniority among
devotees. The mother spends more time tending the sickly child. She just
asks the older children to look after themselves, but she feeds the infant with
her own hand. That does not mean that she has no love toward the grown-
ups. So too, do not think that because I do not ostensibly pay more attention
to one person, that person is beyond the ken of my prema . Note this also. In
this Avatar (divine Incarnation), the wicked will not be destroyed; they will be
corrected and reformed and educated and led back to the path from which
they have strayed. The white-ant infested tree will not be cut; it will be
saved. Again, this Avatar will not select some place other than the place
where the Nativity took place for the centre of Its divine sports, miracle
powers, and divine instruction). This tree shall not be transplanted; it will
grow where it first rose from the earth. Another speciality is this: the
Avatar has no affinity or attachment in Its career to members of the family
wherein it appeared. Unlike the appearances as Rama, Krishna, etc., where
the Life was played out mostly among and for the family members, this
Avatar is only for the devotees, noble souls, and aspirants on. It has no
recitation of holy name, meditation, or yoga (practising union with God). It
knows no worship; It will not pray to anything, for It is the Highest. It only
teaches you to worship and pray. To a worldly person, a God-intoxicated man
will appear mad, and the person will laugh at him for it. But to the God-
intoxicated man, the worldly appear insane, foolish misled, blind. Of all the
insanities that harass people, God-madness is the least harmful, the most
beneficial. The world has suffered untold damage due to its "mad" rulers and
"mad" guides; but nothing but harmony, peace, brotherliness, and love have
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 18Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 2 - Total Surrender
 come out of 'God-madness'!
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 19Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 3 - God As Guide
 3. God As Guide
Date: 01 August 1956  / Location:  Prasanthi Nilayam  / Occasion:  Guru Purnima
 
God is Supreme Energy ( Mahasakthi ) and the individual being is deluding
power ( mayasakthi ); He is the genuine, the individual being is but the
shadow, the appearance, the delusion. Even I have to put on deluding power
to come into your midst, like the policeman who is compelled to wear the
dress of the thief so that he can get entry into the gang of thieves to
apprehend them and bring them to book!  
The Lord cannot come down with His Supreme Energy unimpaired; He has to
come with diminished splendour and limited effulgence, so that He can
become the object of devotion and dedicated service. In this world, which is
impermanent and ever transforming, the Immanent Power of the Lord is the
only permanent and fixed entity. In order to realise the eternal and the true,
one has perforce to attach oneself to that Source and Sustenance. There is no
escape from this path. It is the destiny of one and all, irrespective of age or
scholarship, clime or caste, sex or status. While proceeding along the road,
you can watch your shadow falling on mud or dirt, hollow or mound, thorn or
sand, wet or dry patches of land. You are unaffected by the fate of your
shadow, is it not? Nor is the shadow made dirty thereby. It does not worry in
the least where it falls or what it wades through. We know that the shadow
and its experiences are not eternal or true. Similarly, you must get convinced
that "you" are but the shadow of the Absolute; you are essentially not this
"you" but the absolute itself. That is the remedy for sorrow, travail, and pain.
 The first step in spiritual discipline
Of course, it is only at the end of a long and systematic process of spiritual
practice that you will get fixed in the truth; until then, you are apt to identify
yourself with this body and forget that the body, which casts a shadow, is
itself a shadow. The first step in spiritual practice is adherence to
dharma (righteousness) in every individual and social act. The dharma
that is followed in relation to the objective world will automatically lead on to
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 20Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 3 - God As Guide
 dharma in the spiritual field also; only you must stick to it through thick and
thin. When Aswathama in the blindness of his fury slaughtered the children of
the Pandavas, Arjuna, who caught him prisoner, threatened to cut off his
head; but Droupadi, the bereaved mother, interceded to save him! She said it
was not dharma to return murder for murder, to slay the son of one's own
guru. Such steadfastness is needed in the path of dharma; that alone is the
sign of true surrender: "Let the Will of the Lord prevail; one's duty is but to
connect oneself with the current of His Grace." While in jail, the prisoner
cannot call even his clothes his own; so too, while in this jail serving your
term, what can you call your own? He gives you food and clothing. He lets you
go when the sentence ends, or perhaps sooner if He is pleased by your
behaviour while in prison.
 Keep the faith in the Lord undiminished
The greatest obstacle on the path of surrender is egoism and
mineness or possessiveness. It is something that has been inherent in
your personality since ages, sending its tentacles deeper and deeper with the
experience of every succeeding life. It can be removed only by the twin
detergents of discrimination and renunciation. Devotion is the water to wash
away this dirt of ages and the soap of repetition of God's name, meditation,
and communion (yoga) will help to remove it quicker and more effectively.
The slow and the steady will surely win this race; walking is the safest method
of travel, though it may be condemned as slow. Quicker means of travel
mean disaster; the quicker the means, the greater the risk of disaster. You
should eat only as much as you feel hunger, for more will cause disorder. So
proceed step by step in spiritual effort; making sure of one step before you
take another. Do not slide back two paces when you go one pace forward.
But even the first step will be unsteady if you have no faith. So cultivate faith.
Sathyabama once asked Krishna, "Why are you, doing things like ordinary
men? Yudhistira, the eldest of the Pandavas is the best of the brothers, but
you hobnob always with Arjuna, whose reputation is not above board." Her
faith was not steady! What do people know of the motives that prompt the
Lord and His actions? Some found fault with Narada for repeating the name of
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 21Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 3 - God As Guide
 the Lord, always, without intermission. But until merging in the Absolute
occurs, the name has to be used. The idea of separation will end only with
mergence, not before that. Do not waver or doubt when once you are
convinced. Seek to understand and satisfy yourself. After that, do not be
misled. When the sun is over your head there will be no shadow; similarly
when faith is steady in your head it should not cast any shadow of doubt.
When man loses his way and strays into the wilderness, believing that he is
the body or the qualities or the object, then the Avatar comes to warn and
guide. Keep the faith in the Lord undiminished; you can then safely move
about in the world. No harm can come to you! Be like the village women with
pots over their heads, one over the other, keeping balance even while talking
and walking along the winding lane. They do not forget or ignore the burden
or the goal. They are vigilant, conscious of the hardships on the way, the
stones and the pits; it is inner concentration that pays dividends.
 One should depart the world with a smile
Everyone has to make their exit some day. That moment should not be a
moment of anguish; one should depart gracefully, with a smile and a bow. In
order to do that, a lot of preparation is necessary. To depart, leaving all that
has been accumulated during a long lifetime, is a hard task; so prepare for it
by discarding attachment to one thing after another from now on. You see
many things in dreams, and many things are acquired by you during dreams:
power, pelf, status, reputation. But when you awake, you do not weep over
the loss, even though for the duration of the dream all that was very real and
gave you real satisfaction and joy. That was a "dream", you tell yourself; what
prevents you from treating with similar nonchalance the possessions
gathered during the waking stage of your life? Cultivate that attitude, and you
can depart with a smile whenever the curtain falls on this dreamland stage.
 Pray to the Lord to show you the way
In order to bring conviction to you in all this, it is best you approach a guru
(spiritual preceptor) who knows the truth by experience and whose daily
activities, words, and thoughts reflect this realisation. The guru is called
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 22Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 3 - God As Guide
 so because the letter GU signifies gunatheetha - one who has
transcended the three gunas (qualities), the thamasic, the rajasic,
and even the sathwic (ignorant, passionate, and virtuous) - and the
letter RU signifies one who is rupa varjitha (one who has grasped the
formless aspect of God-head). Of course, one could come to that stage
only through the sublimation of the lower into the higher qualities and the
steady and conscious ignoring of the part played by mere name and form.
In the preliminary stages of spiritual discipline, name, form, and quality all
have their part to play in the moulding of the spirit. The guru destroys the
illusion and sheds light; his presence is cool and comforting. That is why this
day, a full-moon day, is allotted for paying due honour to the guru. Moreover,
the moon is the presiding deity of the mind, and the full-moon day is the day
on which the mind has become fully beneficent. Of course, you must know
what you have lost, so that you may start on the search to recover it! The
guru has very often to tell you that you have forgotten your real name or that
you have lost the most precious part of yourself and yet are unaware of the
loss. The guru is the physician for the illness that brings about the suffering of
alternate birth and death. He is an adept at the treatment needed for the
cure. If you do not get such a guru, pray to the Lord Himself to show you the
way and He will surely come to your rescue.
 
The mind must become the servant of the intellect, not the slave of the
senses. It must discriminate and detach itself from the body. Like the ripe
tamarind fruit, which becomes loose inside the shell, it must be unattached
to this shell, this casement called body. Strike a green tamarind fruit with a
stone and you cause harm to the pulp inside, but strike the ripe fruit and see
what happens. It is the dry rind that falls off; nothing affects the pulp or the
seed. The ripe aspirant does not feel the blows of fate or fortune; it is the
unripe man who is wounded by every blow. 
- Sri Sathya Sai Baba
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 23Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 3 - God As Guide
  
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 24Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 4 - Divine Life
 4. Divine Life
Date: April 1957  / Location:  Venkatagiri
 
A convention of the workers of the divine life mission must include all
humanity, for no one is outside its pale, and all are plodding along the road to
the realisation of the Divinity that is immanent in each. The mission on which
every individual has come is to merge the individuality in the Universal. The
life that each being is leading is saturated with the Divine. Existence ( Sath) is
derived from the source of all Existence, Brahman (Supreme Reality) Itself;
Consciousness ( Chith ) is derived from the source of all Consciousness,
Brahman Itself. Bliss (Ananda) is derived from the source of all Bliss, Brahman
Itself. You are all Sath-Chith-Ananda Swarupa (embodiments of Existence-
Consciousness-Bliss), but you are unaware of it and imagine yourself to be
this individual or that, subjected to this limitation or that! This is the myth
that must be exploded in order that divine life may start.
It is the Divine that inspires, that activates, that leads and fulfills the life of
each being, however simple or complex its physical structure may be. From
the atom to the Universe, every single entity is moving toward the estuary
where it merges in the sea of Bliss. Divine life is the very breath of all beings;
it consists of truth, love, and nonviolence ( sathya , prema , and ahimsa ). For
how can any one be false to another when there is no other at all? Falsehood
comes out of fear. When there is no second, there is no fear at all. No one is
loved more than the Self; so, when all is the self-same Self, all is loved as the
Self is loved. As for violence, who is to injure whom, when all are but one?
 Faith in the Almighty will remove anxiety
How to lead a divine life? No special membership entitles you to it. Every
struggle to realise the unity behind all the multiplicity is a step on the path of
divine life. You have to churn the milk if you wish to separate and identify the
butter that is immanent in it. So too, you have to carry on certain processes
of thought and action in order to get to the hard core of faith that this world is
a funny mixture of real and unreal, that it is in fact false ( mithya ). Divine life
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 25Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 4 - Divine Life
 does not admit of the slightest dross in character or delusion in intellect. So,
people dedicated to it must emphasise this by precept and example. Wipe out
the root causes of anxiety and fear and ignorance. Then only can your true
personality shine forth. Anxiety is removed by faith in the Lord; the faith that
tells you that whatever happens is for the best and that the Lord's Will be
done. Quiet acceptance is the best armour against anxiety, not the
acceptance of the heroic.
Sorrow springs from egoism, the feeling that you do not deserve to be treated
so badly, that you are left helpless. When egoism goes, sorrow disappears.
Ignorance is just a mistake, mistaken identity of the body as the Self! In fact,
you must each one try to become egoless, and then the Lord will accept you
as His flute. Once, when a number of people were asked by Me what they
would like to be in the hands of God, I got various answers. Some said the
lotus, some the conch, some the discus, but no one mentioned the flute. I
would advise you to become the flute, for then the Lord will come to you, pick
you up, put you to His lips, and breathe through you. Out of the hollowness of
your heart due to the utter absence of egoism that you have developed, He
will create captivating music for all Creation to enjoy. Be straight, without any
will of your own. Merge your will in the Will of God. Inhale only the breath of
God. That is divine life, that is what I want you all to achieve.
 
A mere five-minute inquiry will convince you that you are not the body, the
senses, the mind, or the intelligence, the name or the form, but that you are
the Atma Itself, the same Atma that appears as all this variety. Once you get
a glimpse of this truth, hold on to it; do not allow it to slip. Make it your
permanent possession. 
- Sri Sathya Sai Baba
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 26Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 5 - Meditation On The Lord's Name And Form
 5. Meditation On The Lord's Name And Form
Date: 23 February 1958  / Location:  Prasanthi Nilayam  / Occasion:  Chithravathi River Bed
 
The devotee who spoke first here now was, let me tell you, denying God for
25 years, and it is only since five years, after seeing Me, that he has changed.
Of course, many people have had no experience that could change them, so
they are not to be blamed for their want of faith. So too, this Seshagiri Rao
here was finding fault with his son and daughters for coming to Puttaparthi,
and himself for long refusing to come! One day at Bangalore, there was a
function in the house opposite his, for I had gone there. During bhajans
(group singing of devotional songs), this man hesitantly crossed the road and
peeped into the hall, and I went forward and called him and made him sit
near Me. I asked him to come to Puttaparthi and invited him to "examine" and
"experience". He has been with Me ever since; it is now 18 years since he first
came here. This is just the reason I came to sow the seeds of faith, in religion
and in God. You might have heard some people say that I became Sai Baba
when a scorpion stung me! Well, I challenge any one of you to get stung by
scorpions and transform yourself into Sai Baba. No, the scorpion had nothing
to do with it! In fact, there was no scorpion at all! I came in response to the
prayers of sages, saints, and spiritual aspirants for the restoration of dharma
(righteousness).
 The root cause of all this restlessness
When there is a sign of a little unrest, the police constable appears on the
scene; if the mob gets unruly, the Inspector rushes in; and if it becomes
violent, the Superintendent of Police has to be personally present on the
scene to quell it. If, however, the situation waxes hot, the Inspector General
has to make himself available, is it not? This is a situation in which the I-G is
taking over-all charge of the situation. The sages, savants, saints, yogis, and
divine personalities have had their try, and they will all be cooperating in the
task of reestablishing righteousness and clearing the path for the world
attaining absolute peace (santhi). The greatest defect today is the absence of
inquiry into the nature of the Self. That is the root cause of all this
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 27Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 5 - Meditation On The Lord's Name And Form
 restlessness. If you are eager to know the truth about yourself, then, even if
you do not believe in God, you will not go astray. The pots are all of mud, the
ornaments are all of gold, the clothes are all of yarn. There is unity where one
saw only diversity; the basic substance is one and indivisible. That is Brahman
(Supreme Reality), that is the Atma, which is your own basic substance too.
This inquiry into the nature of the Self is best found in the Upanishads. Just as
a river's flow is regulated by bunds and the flood waters are directed to the
sea, so too the Upanishads regulate and restrict the senses, the mind, and
the intellect and help one to reach the sea and merge individuality in the
Absolute. Study the Upanishads with a view to act accordingly, to put the
advice into practice. Scanning a map or turning over a guide-book will not
give you the thrill of the actual visit, nor will it give you a fraction of the joy
and knowledge of a journey through that land. The Upanishads and the Gita
are only maps and guide-books, remember.
 Call upon the Lord in your own heart
There is the story of a rustic who sat among a gathering of devotees and
listened to the exposition of the Gita by a great scholar. All were wonder-
struck by the scholarly commentary the learned disquisition on each word
and phrase. The rustic, though the exposition was very much over his head,
seemed to attend very closely for he was all the time in tears! When at last
the scholar asked him why he was weeping, he surprised everybody by the
sincerity of his devotion. He said that he wept at the predicament of the Lord,
who had to sit at the head of the chariot and, half turning his neck, hold forth
so long to convince the dull-witted Arjuna. "How much pain must He be
suffering in His neck?," he asked and wept.
That was real devotion, a sure passport to spiritual victory. He had identified
himself with the participants in the episode, and the whole setting had
become alive for him. You need not even read the Gita or the Upanishads.
You will hear a Gita specially designed for you if you call upon the Lord in your
own heart. He is there, installed as your own charioteer. Ask Him and He will
answer.
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 28Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 5 - Meditation On The Lord's Name And Form
 Have the Form of the Lord before you when you sit quietly in a place for
meditation, and have His Name, that is, any Name, when you do repetition of
a holy Name. If you do that repetition without that Picture or Form before you,
who is to give the answer? You cannot be talking all the time to yourself. The
Form will hear, and the Form will respond. All agitations must cease one day,
is it not? Meditation on the Form and repetition of the Name - that is the only
means for this task.
 Stick to the Name and Form you like the most
The secret is: you should "be", but not be as in sleep, when you are aware
deep down within you, that you are. Sleep is enveloped in delusion (maya).
Awake from that delusion, but immerse yourself in this sleep that is the real
super-conscious state of bliss (samadhi). Repetition of the Name and
meditation are means by which you can compel even the concretisation of
the divine Grace, in the Form and with the Name you yearn for. The Lord has
to assume the Form you choose, the Name you fancy; in fact, you shape Him
so. Therefore, do not change these two, but stick to the ones that please you
most, whatever the delay or the difficulty. Do not get discouraged that you
are not able to concentrate for long from the very beginning. When you learn
to ride a bicycle, you do not get the skill of keeping the balance immediately.
You push the cycle along to an open maidan and hop and skip, leaning now to
one side and now to the other and even fall with the cycle upon you on many
an attempt, before you are able to ride with skill and never again to worry
about the balance. Automatically, you are able to make the necessary
adjustments to correct the balance, is it not? After getting this skill, you can
ride through the narrow streets and lanes, and you do not need an open road.
You can negotiate your vehicle through the most crowded thoroughfares. So,
too, practice will equip you with a concentration that will sustain you in the
densest of surroundings and the most difficult situations.
 The best spiritual discipline for the beginners
Do not be under the impression that I will be angry with you if you do not
accept Me as the Form for meditation! I am not concerned at all; you have
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 29Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 5 - Meditation On The Lord's Name And Form
 perfect freedom to select the Name and Form that give you necessary
encouragement. When you meditate, the mind often runs after something
else, it takes another road. You have then to plug that outlet by means of the
Name and the Form and see that the even flow of your thoughts toward the
Lord is not interrupted; if it happens again, use the Name and the Form again,
quickly. Do not allow the mind to go beyond the twin bunds, this side Name
and that side Form! Then it will not stray into a third place.
First, when you sit for meditation, recite a few verses on the glory of God, so
that the thoughts that are scattered could be collected. Then gradually, while
doing repetition of the name, draw before the mind's eye the Form that that
Name represents. When your mind wanders away from the recital of the
Name, take it on to the picture of the Form. When it wanders away from the
picture, lead it on to the Name. Let it dwell either on that sweetness or this.
Treated thus, it can be easily tamed. The imaginary picture you have drawn
will get transmuted into the emotional picture, dear to the heart and fixed in
the memory; gradually will come the time when the Lord assumes that Form
in order to fulfil your desire.
 Use the body as an instrument for spiritual practice
This spiritual practice is called meditation on the Lord's Name and Form, and I
advise you all to take it up, for it is the best for beginners. Within a few days,
you will fall in line and you will taste the joy of concentration. After about ten
or fifteen minutes in the initial stages and longer after some time of this
meditation, have some inward contemplation on the peace and contentment
you had during the meditation; that is to say, bring back into your memory
the joy you experienced. This will help your faith and earnestness.
Then, do not get up suddenly and start moving about, resuming your
avocations. Loosen the limbs slowly, deliberately, gradually, and then enter
upon your usual duties. Taste the fruits of meditation and learn to relish
them; that is what I mean by this process of repeated reflection. Be careful
about your physical health also. Satisfy the demands of nature; the car must
be given the petrol that it needs. Otherwise, your head might reel and your
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 30Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 5 - Meditation On The Lord's Name And Form
 eyes might get blurred through sheer exhaustion.
How can thoughts of the Lord be stabilised in a weak frame? Only, do not
forget the purpose of this body when you are tending it. A road-roller is fed
with oil and coal and other types of fuel. But why is it kept in good trim? In
order to mend the road, is it not? Similarly, remember that you have come
embodied so that you might realise the end of this cycle of birth and death.
For that sake, use the body as an instrument.
Flying hither and thither, higher and higher, the bird has at last to perch on a
tree for rest. So too, even the richest and the most powerful man seeks rest,
peace (santhi). Peace can be got only in one shop, in inner reality. The senses
will drag you along into a mire, which submerges you deeper and deeper in
alternate joy and grief, that is to say, prolonged discontent. Only
contemplation of unity can remove fear, rivalry, envy, greed, desire - all
feelings that prompt discontent. Every other avenue can give only pseudo-
contentment, and a day will come when you will throw away all these
playthings and toys and cry, "Lord! Grant Me unruffled peace." The bandit
Valmiki prayed so; the confirmed atheist too has one day to pray for peace
and rest.
 Engage yourself in good thoughts and deeds
People hug brass pots and take them to be gold, but they have to polish them
so that they may appear bright. One day, they will get disgusted with this
constant polishing and scrubbing; they will pray, "Release me from this
scrubbing, this birth, this suffering and this agony." Life is short; time is
fleeting: your spiritual practice is creeping at tortoise speed. When will you
decide to proceed a little faster? Your spiritual practice is like the answers you
write at the examination. If you get only 5 or 6 marks, the examiner will strike
out even that, saying, "What is the use of these few marks: it will take you
neither here nor there." If you get somewhere near the passing marks, then
Grace will give you just a little more so that you may pass, provided you have
been a diligent, well behaved student.
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 31Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 5 - Meditation On The Lord's Name And Form
 Engage yourselves in good deeds, good company, and good thoughts. Fix
your attention on the goal. You have not realised yet the secret of this
Advent. You are indeed lucky, more fortunate than many others. It is only
when Yasoda found every length of rope a little short to go round His belly
that she discovered that He was the Lord. So to, you will realise every
description of My Divine Glory a little too short of the actuality, and then you
will get convinced. Meanwhile if you study the spiritual texts and know the
characteristics of the Avatar of the Lord, you might get a glimpse of the Truth
regarding Me.
 You will know the truth when you experience
There is no use arguing and quarrelling among yourselves. Examine,
experience; then you will know the truth. Do not proclaim before you are
convinced. Be silent while you are still undecided or engaged in evaluating. Of
course, you must discard all evil in you before you can attempt to evaluate
the mystery. And, when faith dawns, fence it around with discipline and self-
control, so that the tender shoot might be guarded against the goats and
cattle, the motley crowd of cynics and unbelievers. When your faith grows
into a big tree, those very cattle can lie down in the shade that it will spread.
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 32Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 6 - An Attitude Of Challenge
 6. An Attitude Of Challenge
Date: 02 February 1958  / Location:  Chitthoor  / Occasion:  Kannan High School
 
We heard the address of thanks the sixth form boys gave to the teachers of
the school and the advice they gave to the students of the lower forms. Their
words were very sweet, full of gratitude to the teachers and full of
encouragement to the students who continue to be under the care of those
teachers. They also expressed their grief that they had to leave a fine school
and a fine set of instructors and a fine company of fellow students. But,
though the words were fine, I doubt whether the feelings were also such, for
after all they knew they have to leave the school for higher studies. All these
years, they knew that this day will come. Of course it is good to see the boys
express gratefulness for the benefits they derived. They promised also to
serve their country to the best of their ability. For they are the guardians of
this land in the days to come. I am specially happy in the company of
students, for they are like the buds in the garden; they are the young heroes
who have to take up the difficult task of national and international
reconstruction. The present situation in the world is like a typhoon, causing
unrest and confusion. No one has mental quiet; fear and anxiety stalk
everywhere; panic reigns even while the conquest of space and the mapping
of new planets is being hailed. Even in this country, it is a time of crisis, and
no time should be lost to set matters right so that men may enjoy peace
(santhi) more than anything else; for, without peace, life is a nightmare.
 Tolerate all kinds of persons and opinions
While studying other things, you should also learn the secret of peace. This
opportunity should not be missed, for that is the wisdom that will save you.
The present system of education aims at making you bread winners and
citizens, but it does not give you the secret of a happy life - namely,
discrimination between the unreal and the real,which is the genuine training
you need. Of course, it is not your fault but the fault of those who direct these
affairs. They will have to do it, sooner rather than later. The cultivation of
discrimination is the chief aim of education; the promotion of virtuous habits,
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 33Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 6 - An Attitude Of Challenge
 the strengthening of dharma, these are to be attended to - not the acquisition
of polish or gentlemanliness, or collection of general information and the
practice of common skills. First, be fixed in the consciousness that yourself is
the immortal Atma, which is indestructible, which is holy, pure, and divine.
That will give you unshakable courage and strength. Then, you must develop
mutual love and respect. Tolerate all kinds of persons and opinions, all
attitudes and peculiarities. The school, the home, and society are all training
grounds for tolerance. At school, the teachers and pupils must be aware of
their duties and rights. The relationship must be based on love, not fear. Only
the atmosphere of love can guarantee happy cooperation and concord. Above
all, be good, honest, and well-behaved. That will make the university degrees
more desirable and valuable. Do not attach undue value to the passing of
examinations, for if you do, you are apt to get terribly depressed when you
fail. We hear of too many young people committing suicide when the results
of the examinations are announced. Dear children, do not do any such foolish
thing. Take failure, if it comes, as a spur to further effort; analyse why you
failed and profit by the experience. If you ruin yourself by such foolish
actions, it will pain Me, remember.
 Refuse to become scapegoats of politicians
Learn when you are students how to succeed in the turmoil of life, how to live
without causing pain to others and suffering pain yourself. Do not waste time
taking part in electioneering and quarreling over the factions and fancies of
elders; they are setting you very bad examples, and you must avoid imitating
their low behaviour. Politics is a variety of 'ticks', which infest some
individuals and worry their lives out. Do not catch that infection from them.
Be clean and content. You are too young to understand the complications and
confusions of politics, and you can only be the tools and instruments of
people who want to use you for their own purposes. Be bold; refuse to
become the scapegoats of such men. Tell them you have better work to do.
Proceed only as far as your own talents and experience can take you.
Examine everything, and believe only what appeals to you as correct. Do not
simply say, Sai Baba spoke well, or Sai Baba writes well; respect Sai Baba
only if He does as well as He speaks and writes. Devotion and activity should
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 34Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 6 - An Attitude Of Challenge
 go together. Sri B. Gopala Reddi had come to inaugurate the hospital at
Puttaparthi, and he said, "If only the government had planned this hospital,
even the basement would not have come up now." So also, this school has
risen to this fame and height due to the care and love of the founders and
supporters. All should cooperate in tending such institutions; difference of
opinion must be like the two eyes, each giving a different picture of the same
object; both of which, when coordinated, give a complete rounded picture.
The donors of this school have done a very good thing: they have done it in a
spirit of worship and humanity. Be grateful for their sacrifice, and make the
best use of the chance they have provided.
 India is blessed with many saints and sages
The District Judge in his opening remarks said that Bharath (India) has been
blessed with many saints and sages and with many manifestations of Divinity
in Human Form. A doubt may arise why such appearances take place in
Bharath more than in any other place, when the world is so big and we have
humanity everywhere to be saved and guided. There is a reason for this,
believe Me! Well, why should, in all India, Kolar alone have gold? Where there
is a gold mine, there is the need for mining engineers and chemists who will
extract it, separate it, purify it, and distribute it to the various places where
gold is in demand, is it not? So also, it is here in India that there is a mine of
spiritual wisdom and spiritual treasure: the metaphysical sciences, revelatory
scriptures, the Gita, and the Vedas. This has to be distributed pure and
unsullied, guaranteed in value and quality, to eager aspirants everywhere,
and thus we have here a succession of sages and saints. On account of the
teachings and the lives of these people, there is a vast field of spiritual virtue
in this land, which needs only a little more care to yield a rich harvest.
 Attachment to nature has limits
People suffer because they have all kinds of unreasonable desires, they pine
to fulfill them, and they fail. They attach too much value to the objective
world. It is only when attachment increases that you suffer pain and grief. If
you look upon nature and all created objects with the insight derived from the
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 35Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 6 - An Attitude Of Challenge
 Inner Vision, then attachment will slide away, though effort will remain; you
will also see everything much clearer and with a glory suffused with Divinity
and splendour. Close these eyes and open those inner eyes - what a grand
picture of essential Unity you get! Attachment to nature has limits, but the
attachment to the Lord that you develop when the inner eye opens has no
limit. Enjoy that Reality, not this false picture. The Lord is the Immanent
Power in everything. How can those who refuse to believe that the image in
the mirror is a picture of themselves believe in the Lord, when He is reflected
in every object around them? The moon is reflected in a pot, provided it has
water; so too, the Lord can be clearly seen in your heart, provided you have
the water of love (prema) in it. When the Lord is not reflected in your heart,
you cannot say that there is no Lord; it only means that there is no love in
you. Students and even elders here have given up the study of Sanskrit,
dismissing it as a useless difficult language. They have neglected the ancient
texts, bundling them up and taking them down only on festival days for
worship! But western aspirants who know their worth have taken them to
their own lands, and they have translated them into their own tongues and
learnt their essence with devotion.
 Students must honour physical labour
Reading is not enough. You may master all the commentaries, and you may
be able to argue and discuss with great scholars about these texts, but
without attempting to practise what they teach, it is a waste of time. I never
approve of book-learning; practice is what I evaluate. When you come out of
the examination hall you know whether you will pass or not, is it not? For you
can yourself judge whether you have answered well or not. So too in spiritual
effort or in conduct or in practice, each of you can judge and ascertain the
success or failure that is in store. Spiritual discipline is the essential thing
even for you; no age is too early for it. Just as you tend the body with food
and drink at regular intervals, you must also tend to the needs of the inner
Atmic body by regular repetition of the Name and meditation and the
cultivation of virtues. Holy company, good attitude, and sacred thoughts are
all essential for the growth and the health of the inner personality. The body
is the mansion of the Lord of the world, His Universe. Just as you are
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 36Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 6 - An Attitude Of Challenge
 particular about coffee or tea at regular intervals, be also particular about
meditation and repetition of the Name at fixed times for the health and
liveliness of the spirit.
Students must have challenging attitude toward things; they must honour
physical labour. They should be eager to be of service to those who need it on
account of their disabilities. Honour also your elders, and do not miss any
chance of serving, honouring, or pleasing them. Whatever gives you health,
joy, welcome it, but do not lower yourself by indulging in vulgar pastimes. Do
not wander aimlessly in the streets or frequent cinema halls and mix with
undesirable company, or cultivate bad habits just for sake of fun.
This country has to be raised to great heights through you, not through its
present leaders, remember. Note also that whereas in other countries, people
cooperate gladly with some one who is courageous, intelligent, and good,
here the national trait is to be jealous of one another, to pull down those who
are rising high, and to refuse cooperation and help. You boys must say to
yourselves, "These elders do such things, though they know them to be
wrong. What a pity! But we shall grow up differently. We shall not belie our
words in our actions. We will act together in harmony and love." If you
develop such virtues, the nation will prosper; if not, it will be ruined. Have this
warning always ringing in your ears.
I bless all of you - citizens, parents, teachers, and students. This school, which
was established by the generosity of the people, will grow into higher status
and shine as a great institution. I have no doubt of that.
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 37Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 7 - Courage
 7. Courage
Date: 03 March 1958  / Location:  Chitthoor  / Occasion:  B. Z. High School
 
This talk was not previously planned, but it is a case of the prayer of devotees
being fulfilled. I am not giving you any new advice today; it is the same
advice that I have given to students in many places. For places may be
different but students are the same, and their nature, character, ideals and
problems are the same in all places. The President of this meeting said just
now that you are all busy preparing for the examinations and that many of
you have taken up your books only now. This has become quite usual now-a-
days; nine months of the year you read all kinds of trash, and in the two or
three months left you pore over the really essential books. This is not correct!
It is very harmful to stuff the brain with all kinds of unwanted and paltry
things. When you have some free time, read and assimilate such books as will
promote an intelligent appreciation of the world and its mystery. To live a
happy, peaceful and contended life, good education is necessary, education
that is based on dharma (righteousness). Do not develop a dread of
examinations; there, in a fixed time, you have to write answers to a certain
number of questions. Well, some students start answering the very first
question and go on serially with the rest. But it is always better to pause a
little, read the entire question paper, select the questions that you can tackle
with confidence, and write the answers for these in the beginning. This will
give you a good fillip to exercise your brains better for answering the more
difficult questions later.
 Cultivation of virtues is very important
Never lose courage in the examination hall or outside. Courage is the fertilizer
that will make the plant of scholarship grow. The field may be good, but
manuring is also necessary. You must all become heroes, adventurous and
bold; prepare for that role from now on. Man has inside him a whole set of
animals: the dog, the fox, the ass, the wolf. But he must suppress the
tendencies of all these animals and encourage the human qualities of love
and friendship to shine forth. Friendship that is cultivated from childhood
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 38Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 7 - Courage
 onward is more lasting, so try to cultivate real friends now. Above all, begin
the cultivation of virtues; that is more important and beneficial than mere
book learning. That gives real bliss (ananda); that is the essence of all
knowledge, the culmination of all learning. Treat every one as your own
people and, even if you cannot do them any good, desist from causing them
any injury. Burn the lamp of love inside the niche of your heart, and the
nocturnal birds of greed and envy will fly away, unable to bear the light. Love
(Prema ) makes you humble; it makes you bend and bow when you see
greatness and glory. An unbending person is infected with egoism of the
worst type; remember man is the only animal that can recognise and revere
the great and the glorious. Use that capacity and derive the best advantage
out of it. Just as two wires, the positive and the negative, are brought
together to produce illumination, similarly, the Supreme Self ( Paramatma )
and the spiritual aspirant have to come together in yoga , to grant
illumination. So, go to the holy men and holy places and keep company with
pious men. A magnet attracts only iron; a student attracts toward him only
those who will help his study, only such things as will give him joy and daring
(ananda and dhairya ).
 The easiest habit is speaking the truth
Have faith that Truth will save you in the long run; stick to it, regardless of
what might befall. For if you are true, the sense of guilt will not gnaw your
insides and cause pain. It is cowardice that makes you hide the truth; it is
hatred that sharpens the edge of falsehood. Be bold, and there is no need for
a lie. Be full of love, and there is no need for subterfuge. The easiest habit is
speaking the truth, honesty, for if you start telling lies, you will have to keep
count of them and remember how many you have told to whom and be
always alert not to contradict one lie with another! Love people, and you need
no longer deceive them with a lie; you will feel that they deserve the truth
and nothing less than the truth. Love saves a good deal of bother. Do not be
led away by all this present-day talk of equality, either of men and women or
of all men. Each has a certain fund of intelligence and a peculiar bundle of
instincts and impulses and past impressions. To the extent that you develop
them or divert them or diminish their strength, to that extent there is bound
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 39Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 7 - Courage
 to be difference in your equipment and achievement. Use all chances you get
to develop your skills and your health and your character. That is your
present duty. Make lasting friendships. Do not by any action of yours cause
pain to another; nor suffer pain yourself by foolishness or sheer bravado. In
your school, I find there are some girls too; treat them with great respect and
do not speak slightingly of them. They are your sisters and by honouring
them, you bring honour to yourselves and your sisters. Respect for women is
a sign of real culture. So, I call upon you to read good books, revere your
teachers, and love all. Do not dishonour your elders. Cultivate the spirit of
service and learn how to serve the sick and the needy and seize every chance
to help others. Or at least, desist from causing sorrow to others.
 
In your daily affairs, do not create factions or revel in hatred. See the good
in others and the faults in yourselves. Revere others as having God installed
in them; revere yourself also as the seat of God. Make your heart pure so He
can reside therein. 
- Sri Sathya Sai Baba
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 40Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 8 - Many Roads
 8. Many Roads
Date: 24 March 1958  / Location:  Chennai, Y.M.I.A., Mylapore
 
I have not come to you to "lecture", for I do not believe in the value of mere
words, however scholarly or pompous or profuse. I have come only to share
with you My Prema (Love) and partake in turn of your prema . It is that which I
value most. That is the real gain. Today, the typhoon of hatred and falsehood
is scattering the clouds of virtue, justice, and truth to the far corners of the
sky, and people feel that Sanathana Dharma (Eternal Universal Religion) itself
is in danger of extinction. But that can happen only if the Lord wills, and the
Lord who has laid down dharma will not allow it to be destroyed. Wherever
truth, right conduct, peace, and love ( sathya , dharma , santhi , and prema ) are
emphasised, in whatever religion or language, by whichever teacher,
wherever the teacher may be, there we have Sanathana Dharma . As long as
man is capable of prema , dharma will exist, do not doubt it. When that
prema is fixed on the Lord, your mental make-up will slowly and steadily
undergo a revolutionary change; then, man will share in the sorrows and joys
of his fellow-beings; thereafter, he contacts the very source of the bliss, which
is beyond the temporary gains and losses of this world. Prema directed to the
Lord is called devotion, and it is the easiest of all the paths to realise the goal.
 For treading the path of devotion, one needs only Love
Devotion can be spoken of as having several stages. There is the stage where
service of the Lord alone matters and is its own reward; the devotee does not
seek anything more than just the service of the highest, done to the utmost of
capacity. This gradually becomes the stage where nothing except the Name
and Form of the Beloved is cognised. Again, there is devotion coloured by the
three inner qualities ( gunas ): the attitude of the afflicted, the seeker of
worldly comfort, the sincere inquirer, and the wise man, who is silent and
content with the realisation that all is He. For treading the path of devotion,
one needs no scholarship, nor wealth nor riches, nor ascetic rigours. Tell Me,
what was the lineage of Valmiki, the wealth of Kuchela, the scholarship of
Sabari, the age of Prahlada, the status of Gajaraja, the attainments of Vidura?
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 41Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 8 - Many Roads
 Prema - that was all they had, and that was all they needed. The Grace of the
Lord is as the Ocean: vast, limitless. By your spiritual disciplines, your
repetition of a Name of God, meditation, and systematic cultivation of virtue,
this Grace is converted into clouds of truth; and they rain on humanity as
prema showers, which collect and flow as the flood of bliss ( ananda ), back
again into the Ocean - the Ocean of the Lord's Grace. When prema embraces
humanity, we call it compassion, the quality not of pity but of sympathy -
sympathy that makes one happy when others are happy and miserable when
others are unhappy. You have seen beggars singing in the streets, is it not?
They have each of them a pair of cymbals in one hand by which they mark
time and a single-stringed instrument in the other, to the twang of which they
tune their singing, The song will be harsh if it is out of tune, and it will be
confusing medley if the timing is not kept up. The song of life has to be
similar; keep up the daily tasks and sing away in joy to the tune of prema .
Then only is the music worthwhile.
 Two main principles to follow in life
It is the mind that makes or mars a person. If it is immersed in things of the
world, it leads to bondage; if it treats the world as but temporary, then by
that detachment it becomes free and light. Train the mind not to feel
attached to things that change for better or for worse. Do not hold before it
the tinsels of worldly fame and riches; attract it toward lasting joys derived
from springs inside you. That will bring big rewards. The mind itself will then
become the guru, for it leads you on and on, once it has tasted the sweets of
listening, recapitulating, and repeated steady meditation. It is the mind that
fills the image made by the potter with the Divinity that the devotee sees in
it; it is the mind that fills the shrine room with the fragrance of holiness. It is
practice, one reads, that imparts strength, as food does when digested and as
exercise does to promote health. Saint Thyagaraja sang that the Lord is the
inner motive force within the ant as well as the Universe; but though you may
intellectually agree, when an ant bites, you do not feel that you have come in
contact with the Lord in that form, do you? Do not proclaim great truths
aloud; instead, show by your conduct that you attach value to them and that
you are guided by them. Be careful of at least this: do not yourself commit
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 42Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 8 - Many Roads
 those faults of which you accuse others, and do not ask others to reach a
standard that you are loathe to climb up to! If you live according to these two
principles, then even if you do not fall before an image or attend the temple
ritual or worship as per schedule, you can secure the Lord's Grace.
 It is possible to see the Lord dwell in every being
There are many roads through which you can reach Madras; so also there are
many roads to Godhead: love, truth, service, compassion, and remembrance
of the Lord's Name. There is also the non-dualist who discovers themself as
the basic substance of all creation, as Brahman itself. All paths are right; only
some are easier, some more circuitous, some harder. The easiest way to
grasp the basic reality is to see the Lord in every creature, the Lord sporting
in all this multiplicity, as the underlying reality of all, the Indweller in all
Beings. You might wonder and even doubt how it is possible for the Lord to
dwell in every being. But have you not seen one single mango seed grow into
a tree that gives thousands of fruits, in each of which there is to be found a
seed identical to the one which was first planted? So too, the one Lord can be
found in every being created by His Will.
 Ask only for devotion and spiritual wisdom from Me
Remember, your real nature is the same as the other person's; the other is
yourself known by another name. When you do a good deed, you are doing it
to yourself; when you do a bad turn to someone, remember, you are injuring
yourself, so avoid doing evil to others. I am reminded of what Hussain, the
son of Rabbia Malik of Persia, used to do. He rose early and went to the
mosque for prayers with great diligence and devotion. When he came back,
he found the servants of the house still sleeping on their mats, and he grew
wild at them. He swore and cursed them for neglect of religious duties. Then
his father chastised him, "Son, why do you get angry with those poor souls,
who are too tired to wake up early. Do not wipe off the good results of your
adherence to the rule of God by falling foul of these innocent slaves. I would
much rather you rise late and abstain from the mosque, for now you have
grown proud that you are more religious than these others, and you dare
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 43Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 8 - Many Roads
 blame them for faults for which they are not themselves responsible." You
must pay attention to these small details also, for devotion is not just a pose;
it is a series of little acts, directed by the attitude of reverence for the Divinity
in all beings. Watch for the lie that lurks on the tongue, the violence that lurks
behind the fist, the ego that lurks behind the deed. Restrain them before they
grow into habits and settle down as character to warp your destiny.
Ramaswami Reddy said that I work many miracles and that you are all lucky
to have had this opportunity of hearing Me. Well, I am like a shop-keeper
whose shop is stocked with all things one needs. But, like the man behind the
counter, I give you only what you ask for. If the customer asks for a towel,
how can I give them a skirt ( dhothi )? But these material things are not
important at all. Ask for devotion and for spiritual wisdom, and I shall be
happy. Many do not crave for such things now; it is their misfortune. They are
merely wasting their precious chance. Perhaps the elders are to be blamed
for this situation. For it is the duty of the elders to show the rising generation
by their lives that spiritual discipline and study have made them more joyful
and courageous in the adventure of life. Youths always imitate the elders;
they quarrel if they find the elders deriving joy from quarrels; they cavil at
holiness if the elders do not honour holy men and institutions. So I will not
blame the young men as much as the elders.
 Piety is not weakness but strength
Faith in God and in spiritual discipline has declined due to want of enthusiasm
among the elders in these matters. It is the responsibility of all pious men to
demonstrate in and through their lives that piety is not weakness but
strength, that it opens up a vast spring of power, and that a person with faith
in God can overcome obstacles much more easily than one who has not. I do
not insist that a person should have faith in God. I refuse to call any person an
atheist. Beings exist as a result of His Will, in accordance with His Plan, so no
one is beyond His Grace. Besides, everyone has love toward some one thing
or other, and that love is a spark of the Divine. Everyone has ultimately to
base their life on some one Truth; that Truth is God. No life can be lived out in
complete defiance of Truth; one has to pay heed to truth and speak the truth
to some one in order to make life worth living. Now, that moment is God's
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 44Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 8 - Many Roads
 moment, and at the moment when one utters the truth, or loves, or serves or
bends, one is a theist. So, it is not even devotion that is essential. It is love,
truth, virtue, the eagerness to progress, to serve, to expand one's heart, to
take in the whole of humanity in one's love, to see all as Forms of the Divine
Consciousness.
 
There is no living being without the spark of love; even a mad man loves
something or somebody intensely. But you must recognise this love as a
reflection of the Embodiment of Love, that is, your reality, of the God who is
residing in your heart. Without that spring of Love that bubbles in your
heart, you will not be prompted to love at all. Recognise that spring, rely on
it more and more, develop its possibilities, try to irrigate the whole world
with it, discard all touch of self from it, do not seek anything in return for it
from those to whom you extend it. 
- Sri Sathya Sai Baba
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 45Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 9 - Examine, Experience
 9. Examine, Experience
Date: 25 March 1958  / Location:  Chennai
 
I have come to comfort your life, not to describe Mine! So I did not like
Ramanatha Reddy and Kasturi speaking about Me and the incidents of My
life! Your lives are more important for Me, for My purpose is to see that you
live more happily and with greater contentment. All beings have to do
karma (sanctified activity); it is a universal inescapable obligation. Some feel
that only meritorious and sinful, or virtuous and vicious, deeds are entitled to
be called karma . But your very breathing is karma . There are certain
karmas whose fruits you cannot give up! There are physical, mental, and
spiritual karmas , and doing each of these for the good of the Self is called
dedication. Mention was made of Puttaparthi, and you were advised to go
there and draw inspiration from the bhajans (devotional singing) there. Please
do not incur the expense; for wherever you are, whenever you call on Me,
your room can become Prasanthi Nilayam, your village can be made
Puttaparthi. I am ever alert to respond, ever ready to listen and reply. I want
you to be active, fully engaged, for if you have no activities, time will hang
heavily on your hands. Do not waste a single moment of the allotted span of
life, for time is the body of God. He is known as the Form of Time. It is a crime
to misuse time or to waste it in idleness. So too, the physical and mental
talents given to you by the Lord as capital for the business of living should not
be frittered away.
 Social service must be done gladly and reverentially
Like the force of gravitation, which drags everything down, the pull of sloth
will drag you relentlessly down, so you must be ever on the watch, be ever
active. Like the brass vessel that has to be scrubbed to a nice shine, the mind
of man has also to be scrubbed by means of spiritual discipline, that is to say,
activity like repetition of the Name and meditation. Karma (activity) that is
natural and automatic, like breathing, becomes an impious act when it is
done consciously, with a definite result in view. A Hindu and his British friend
once happened to come to the bank of the Godavari. The Hindu said, "I will
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 46Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 9 - Examine, Experience
 bathe in this sacred water." He recited the name "Hari" as he plunged in and
came out refreshed in mind as well as body. He felt great happiness that he
got the rare chance of a bath in the holy river. The Britisher laughed and said,
"This is mere H2O; how can you get unspeakable joy by dipping into it? It is
all superstition. But the Hindu replied, "Leave me to my superstition; you can
stick to your superstition." The cynic got only physical cleanliness but the
believer got mental purity also. When you prostrate before elders, the mind
too must be humble; it is not the body alone that should bend. Now, many
social workers in Madras visit hospitals and do service to the patients there.
Most of the work they do is mechanical, like fanning the patients, writing
letters for them, and singing bhajans , without paying heed to the actual
requirements of the patients. Many do this work because it is the current
mode of social service. But it must be karma done with the full cooperation of
the mind, gladly, intelligently, reverentially. The patient should not feel
disgusted at the fussiness of the social worker; the patient should be looking
forward to the arrival of the person, of someone who is very near and dear. If
you do not like that type of work, you need not engage in it. Do not burden
your mind by the unpleasantness of the task. Work done mechanically is like
the flame of an oilless wick; the oil is mental enthusiasm; pour it, and the
lamp will burn clear and long.
 Karma should not be done anticipating any result
In fact, karma (activity) becomes yoga (union with God) when it is done
without any attachment. A monk should not even remember what he does; he
should not do any karma anticipating any result. That is the desireless ideal
at its highest. The best karma is that which is done at the call of duty;
because it has to be done, not because it is advantageous to do it. The monk
should have no anger, anxiety, envy, or greed, but your experience must be
telling you that monks who are free from these are very rare today. Do not
even cast your glance at a monk who is so false to his vow that he craves for
name and fame or indulges in calumny or competition. Do not be led away by
such persons into disbelieving the spiritual texts and the Vedas . One who is
firmly fixed in the faith that this world is a mirage of the mind - that one alone
is the swami ; the others are mere Ramaswamis or Krishnaswamis, entitled to
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 47Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 9 - Examine, Experience
 have the epithet swami at the end of the name and not at the beginning.
Nature is purathana - a very ancient entity. The individual soul is also
purathana , having had many previous entries and exits. But now it has come
in with a new dress; it is nuthana (modern), come like a pilgrim to a holy
place for going the rounds. The individual soul must have a guide who will
show the sacred spots and help fulfill the pilgrimage. That Guide is the Lord
Himself: the Guide books are Vedas , the Upanishads , and the spiritual texts.
The essence of the scriptures lies in this one rule: Repeat the name of the
Lord, keeping His Glory always before the mind.
 Earn the right to approach God without fear
The Lord is as the divine wish-fulfilling tree, which gives whatever is asked.
But you have to go near the tree and wish for the thing you want. The atheist
is the person who keeps far away from the tree; the theist is the one who has
come near; that is the difference. The tree does not make any distinction; it
grants boons to all. The Lord will not punish or take revenge if you do not
recognise Him or revere Him. He has no special type of worship that alone
can please him. If you have the ear, you can hear " Om" announcing the Lord's
Presence in every sound. All five elements produce this sound, " Om". The bell
in the temple is intended to convey the Om as the symbol of the Omnipresent
God. When the bell sounds " Om", the Godhead within you will awaken, and
you will be aware of His Presence. That is the meaning of the bell that is rung
in front of the inner shrine in the temple. Earn the right to approach the Lord
without fear and the right to ask for your heritage. You must become so free
that praise will not emanate from you when you approach the Lord. Praise is a
sign of distance and fear. You must have heard the Kalidasa story. He said
that he would get liberation, "as soon as I go," that is to say, as soon as the
ego disappears, for then he shines in his native splendour, as Brahman (as
the indestructible Atma ). The I, when crossed out, becomes the symbol of
cross; what is crucified is the ego, remember. Then, the divine nature
manifests itself unhampered.
 Do spiritual practices in an atmosphere of joy
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 48Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 9 - Examine, Experience
 The ego is most easily destroyed by devotion, by dwelling on the
magnificence of the Lord, and by rendering service to others as children of
the Lord. You can call on the Lord by any name, for all names are His; select
the Name and Form that appeals to you most. That is why 1000 names are
composed for the various forms of God; you have the freedom and the right
to select any one of the thousand. The guru will give you the Name and Form
suited to your temperament and meritorious acts. If the guru commands you
under a threat and orders you to adopt a line of spiritual exercise, declaring
"This is my command," tell him that the main thing is your satisfaction, not
his. You have to do the spiritual exercise in an atmosphere of joy and
contentment. The guru should not force the disciple to grow with a bent in the
direction that the guru prefers; disciples have the right to develop on their
own lines, according to their impressions from the past and bent of mind. The
old relationship of guru and pupil has today become topsy-turvy; rich and
influential pupils now rule the guru and dictate how he should behave. The
gurus also, keen on accumulating fame and wealth, stoop to the tactics
recommended by the pupils and thus lower their status. So, examine the guru
and his credentials, his ideals and practice, before accepting him. Even in My
case, do not be attracted simply by stories of what I "create" by a wave of the
hand. Do not jump to conclusions with closed eyes; watch, study, and weigh.
Never yield to anyone unless you feel the inner satisfaction that you are on
the right path. Above all, do not talk ill of great men and sages. That is a sign
of gross egoism and the childish impertinence born of that conceit. My
suggestion to you today is this: just as you attend to the needs of the body,
feeding it three times a day, in order to keep it in good running condition, so
too spend some time regularly every day to keep your Inner Consciousness in
good trim. Spend one hour in the morning, another at night, and a third in the
early hours of dawn, the Brahma-muhurtha as it is called, for repetition of the
name and meditation on the Lord. You will find great peace descending on
you and great new sources of strength welling up within you as you progress
in this spiritual discipline. After some time, the mind will dwell on the Name
wherever you are and whatever you are engaged in, and peace and joy will
be your inseparable companions.
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 49Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 10 - Discrimination And Detachment
 10. Discrimination And Detachment
Date: 22 July 1958  / Location:  Gudur
 
You are all standing in the open, on the road, and some are even perched on
trees; it is really cruel for Me to speak to you for long. But in spite of all this
inconvenience, I find you yearn to hear My words, so I shall satisfy you. Well,
man is divine, take it from Me. He is really here on a holy mission, for a divine
purpose. To consider one as mean or weak or sinful is a great mistake. That is
itself a great sin. A person must earn their birthright, namely, peace ( santhi ).
Restlessness is an unnatural state. One's real nature is peace To recover the
heritage of peace, people try various methods: accumulation of riches,
maintenance of health, mastery of knowledge, cultivation of the arts. But
these are not fundamental. Three basic wants still remain after all these
methods have been tried: the need for reality, light, and immortality. Only
when existence, divine light, and divine nectar are won will peace be
stabilised. It is no use indulging in arguments and disputations; one who
clamours aloud has not grasped the truth, believe Me. Silence is the only
language of the realised. Practise moderation in speech. That will help you in
many ways. It will develop love ( prema ), for most misunderstandings and
factions arise out of carelessly spoken words. When the foot slips, the wound
can be healed, but when the tongue slips, the wound it causes in the heart of
another will fester for life. The tongue is liable to four big errors: uttering
falsehood, scandalising, finding fault with others, and excessive articulation.
These have to be avoided if there has to be peace ( santhi ) for the individual
as well as for society. The bond of brotherhood will be tightened if people
speak less and speak sweet. That is why silence was prescribed as a vow for
spiritual aspirants by the spiritual texts. You are all spiritual aspirants at
various stages of the road, so this discipline is valuable for you also.
 Prema must transform all relationships
Love ( Prema ) is what the individual and the nation must cultivate now for
progress. Hindustan became great on account of the flood of prema that
swept over the land for centuries. Prema must again transform all
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 50Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 10 - Discrimination And Detachment
 relationships - social, economic, educational, professional, family, religious,
legal, and others. The father must love the child a little more intensely and
intelligently; the mother must spread love to all who come within her
influence; children must love the servants. The sense of equality that
everyone is the repository of the divine Essence must transmute social and
individual behaviour.
 Discrimination and detachment are given only to humans
You can call Me Embodiment of Divine Love ( Premaswarupa )! You will not be
wrong! Prema is the wealth that I have and that I scatter among the
miserable and afflicted. I have no other riches. The Grace of the Lord is
always flowing like the electric current through the wire. Fix a bulb, and the
current, to the extent of the wattage, will illumine your home. The bulb is the
spiritual exercises you perform; the home is your heart. Come to Me gladly;
dive into the sea and discover its depth; there is no use dipping near the
shore and swearing that the sea is shallow and has no pearls. Dive deep and
you will secure your desire. Remember, the sword of prema has to be kept in
the sheath of wisdom. The senses have to be rigorously controlled by
discrimination and detachment, the twin talents given exclusively to humans.
Discrimination instructs you how to choose your avocations and your
associates. It tells you the relative importance of objects and ideals.
Detachment saves you from too much attachment and injects a sense of
relief, at times of elation or despair. They are the two wings that lift the bird
into the air. They hold before you the impermanence of the world and
permanence of the Bliss of Reality. They prompt you to direct your lives
toward spiritual disciplines and the never failing contemplation of the glory of
the Lord.
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 51Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 11 - Man And God: Nara And Narayana
 11. Man And God: Nara And Narayana
Date: 25 July 1958  / Location:  Nellore
 
Everything in its own good time, they say; the fruit has to grow and ripen
before the sourness is turned to sweetness. I have been coming to this town
for ten years, but it is only this evening that you, in this vast multitudinous
gathering, have been able to derive this bliss of hearing Me discoursing! I am
happy to meet all of you in one auspicious hour collected all in one place. All
that I can tell you about spiritual disciplines have been told often before;
man's capacity, his nature, his talents are all ancient possessions, so the
advice regarding how to use them is also very ancient. The only new thing is
man's perverse behaviour - the directions in which he has been wasting his
talents, misusing his capacity, and playing false to his own nature. He has
been forgetting the path prescribed in the scriptures for the cultivation of his
nature, and hence all this suffering; hence also My advent. People are
essentially discriminating animals, endowed with discrimination. One is not
content with the satisfaction of mere animal needs; one feels some void,
some deep discontent, some unslaked thirst, for one is a child of Immortality
and feels that death is not and should not be the end. This discrimination
urges one to discover answers to haunting problems: "Where did I come from,
whither am I journeying, which is the journey's end?" So, the intellect has to
be kept sharp and clear. There are three types of intellect, according to the
predominance of one or other of the three qualities (gunas ): (1) inertia or
sloth (thamas ), which confuses truth with the untruth and takes untruth as
truth; (2) passion or activity (rajas ), which, like a pendulum, swings from one
to the other, hovering between the two, unable to distinguish between them;
and (3) purity or serenity (sathwa ), which knows which is truth and which is
untruth.
 Poised state is essential to reach the goal
The world today is suffering from passionate intellect rather than an inertia
intellect; people have violent likes and dislikes; they have become fanatical
and factious. They are carried away by pomp and noise, show and
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 52Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 11 - Man And God: Nara And Narayana
 propaganda. That is why discrimination has become necessary. To reach the
goal, an equanimous intellect is essential; it will seek the Truth calmly and
stick to it whatever the consequence. I have come to help all to acquire this
serene, equanimous nature. You might have heard people talk about the
miracles, of My "making" this and 'giving' that, of my fulfilling all your wants,
of My curing your illness. But they are not as important as the poised,
equanimous state. I appreciate, promote, and instill. Of course, I confer on
you these boons of health and prosperity, but only so that you might, with
greater enthusiasm and with less interruption, proceed with spiritual practice.
Eat well, so that your physical faculties might grow and the good physique
will in turn develop your intelligence more fully. Devotion (bhakthi ) leads to
power (sakthi ), and power will grant skill (yukthi ). The skill will help you to fix
your attachment (rakthi ) on the proper objects, and your devotion thus
promoted finally results in liberation (mukthi ). A certain amount of attention
has to be paid to the body and its care, as well as to escape the overpowering
handicaps of poverty; but be ever cautious that you are not caught in the
coils and forget the transitoriness of all this. Bring your thoughts constantly
back to the Atma , which is the substance of all the objective world, the basic
reality behind all this appearance.
 Finding fault with others comes out of egoism
The first step in enquiring about the Self is the practice of the truth that
whatever gives you pain gives pain to others and whatever gives you joy
gives joy to others. So do unto others as you would like them to do unto you;
desist from any act in relation to others which if done by them will give you
pain. Thus, a kind of reciprocal relationship will grow between you and others,
and gradually you reach the stage when your heart thrills with joy when
others are joyful and shudders in pain when others are sad. This is not the
kind of affection toward those who are dear to you or those who are your kith
and kin. That is a sign of delusion; but this sharing of joy and grief is
automatic, immediate, universal. It is a sign of great spiritual advance; then
the wave knows that it is part of the ocean and that all waves are but
temporary manifestations of the self-same sea having the same taste as the
ocean itself. The others are part of yourself; you need not worry about them.
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 53Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 11 - Man And God: Nara And Narayana
 Worry about yourself; that is enough. When you become all right, they too will
be all right, for you will no longer be aware of them as separate from you.
Criticising others, finding fault with them, all this comes out of egoism. Search
for your own faults instead. The faults you see in others are your own faults;
the faults you see in others are but reflections of your own personality traits.
Pay no heed to little worries; attach your mind to the Lord. Then you will be
led on to the company of good people and your talents will be transmuted.
 When you love, you will have no fear
Be a bee, drinking the nectar of every flower, not the mosquito drinking blood
and distributing disease in return. First, consider all as children of the Lord, as
your own brothers and sisters; develop the quality of love, seek always the
welfare of humanity. Love and you will be loved in return, hate will never be
your lot if you promote love and look upon all with love. That is the one lesson
I teach always; that is my secret too. If you want to attain Me, cultivate love,
give up hatred, envy, anger, cynicism, and falsehood. I do not ask that you
should be a scholar or a recluse or an ascetic skilled in recitation of holy
Name and meditation. "Is your heart full of love (prema )?" That is all I
examine. Believe that Love is God, Truth is God. Love is Truth, Truth is Love.
For it is only when you love that you have no fear, for fear is the mother of
falsehood. If you have no fear, you will adhere to truth. The mirror of prema
reflects the Atma in you and reveals to you that the Atma is universal,
immanent in every being.
 Parents have to be respected and worshipped
I shall not tell you very complex matters; I shall give only simple remedies for
the ills you are suffering from. I find here a large number of students. Well,
what are they studying for? What is the goal? How are we to judge that they
have studied well? By the salary they are able to get, or the cadre they are
able to secure? No. Education must result in the development of wisdom and
humility. Educated people must be able to distinguish between the
momentary and the momentous, the lasting and the effervescent. They must
not run after glitter and glamour but must seek instead the good and golden.
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 54Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 11 - Man And God: Nara And Narayana
 They must know how to keep the body in good trim, the senses under strict
control, the mind well within check, the intellect sharp and clear, unhampered
by prejudices and hatreds, and the feelings untouched by egoism. They must
know the Atma , too, for that is their very care; that is the effulgence that
illumines their inner and outer selves. This knowledge will ensure joy and
peace and courage for them throughout life. Students also must cultivate the
art of avoiding the infliction of pain on others. I must also tell the students
that they must be grateful to their parents, who give them all the facilities
they now enjoy at great sacrifice. In fact, the parents have to be worshipped
as visible representatives of the Godhead; they are responsible for your very
existence and for all this joy and adventure in the physical and spiritual
spheres. For this reason, they have to be tended and respected and
worshipped. A boy was begging in the streets for food so that he could keep
his bedridden mother and two little sisters alive. One night, when he
clamoured in front of a rich man's house, the master got enraged at his
piteous cries. The boy was very unlucky that day and had collected only a few
morsels; the hour was nearing nine. So he cried most pathetically, and it
aroused the ire of the rich man inside the mansion. He came out and kicked
the boy into the gutter. He was already very weak, for he was starving himself
to feed his mother and sisters, so when he fell, he breathed his last, wailing,
"Mother! Here is a little food for you." His hand held the bowl firm even when
it had become lifeless!
 Parents must set good examples to children
Such is the devotion that the mother invokes and that she deserves, for all
the pain she endured and all the sacrifice she bore so that the son might be
healthy, happy, and good. Show that gratitude to the parents, boys;
remember them and pay them the tribute of at least a tear on the
anniversary of their passing away. Do it with faith (sraddha ), that is why it is
called a religious ceremonial offering to the dead (srardha ); not that the
offerings you make reach them or that they are waiting for them in some
other world. It is a tribute that you should offer in gratitude for the great
chance they gave you for this sojourn in this world with all the wonderful
opportunities it offers for self-realization. Parents too must encourage children
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 55Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 11 - Man And God: Nara And Narayana
 when they evince any interest in spiritual advance and study. They must also
set them good examples. Among the children who are before Me here, there
may be many a Vivekananda and many a Thyagaraja. Children must be given
every facility to develop the divine talents that are in them. Parents must feel
that they are servants appointed by the Lord to tend the little souls that are
born in their households, just as the gardener tends the trees in the garden of
the Master. They must arouse the latent goodness in these tiny hearts by
telling stories about the saints and sages of the past. They must see that
children do not develop fear and become cowards, afraid of walking straight.
 Give up the delusion you are this physical body
You are all the indestructible Atma , believe Me; nothing need discourage you.
In dreams you suffer so much; loss of money, fire, food, insult, etc., but you
are not affected at all. When these things happen during the waking stage,
you feel afflicted. Really, it is not the real "you" that suffers all that. Give up
the delusion that you are this physical entity, and you become really free. And
lastly, about Myself. No one can understand My Mystery. The best you can do
is to get immersed in it. It is no use your arguing about pros and cons; dive
and know the depth; eat and know the taste! Then you can discuss Me to
your heart's content. Develop truth (sathya ) and love (prema ); then you
need not even pray to Me to grant you this and that. Everything will be added
unto you, unasked. Man (nara ) and God (Narayana) are the two wires, the
positive and the negative, which combine to bring electricity through. Nara
will cooperate with Narayana and become the vehicle of Divine Power if nara
has acquired two qualities: truth and love.
 
Individual reconstruction is much more important than the construction of
temples. Multiply virtues, not buildings; practise what you preach, that is the
real pilgrimage; cleanse your minds of envy and malice, that is the real bath
in holy waters. Of what avail is the name of the Lord on the tongue if the
heart within is impure? Injustice and discontent are spreading everywhere
due to this one fault in man: saying one thing and doing the opposite, the
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 56Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 11 - Man And God: Nara And Narayana
 tongue and the hand going in different directions. People have to set
themselves right and correct their food, their recreation, their method of
spending their leisure as well as habits of thought. 
- Sri Sathya Sai Baba
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 57Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 12 - Tolerance
 12. Tolerance
Date: 02 August 1958  / Location:  Venkatagiri
 
I had no idea of speaking to you this evening, but of course, I need no
"preparation". My Resolve and its fulfillment are instantaneous. Sri
Subbaramaiah spoke just now of some important guiding principles of life, like
the cultivation of virtues, the development of character, the control of hatred,
etc. Advice such as this is being given from a hundred platforms every day,
and people listen and depart. But they do not practise what they have heard,
so things remain where they are. This is because those who give advice do
not follow what they preach; they must themselves be examples of the value
of what they teach. Like the blind men who described the elephant, they
describe the advantages of acquiring virtues and the benefits of controlling
hatred more out of hearsay than out of experience. There is deep-rooted
unrest today in every individual, because there is no harmony within. The
social and spiritual rules that have come down from ages prescribe one type
of conduct; the books that one reads recommend another type; experience
gives conflicting advice. But peace depends on the mind and its awareness of
the secret of poise. The body is the caravanserai, the individual soul is the
pilgrim, and the mind is the watchman. The mind seeks happiness; it feels
that happiness can be got in this world from fame, riches, land, and property,
from other individuals or relatives; further, it builds up pictures of heaven
where there is more intense happiness for a longer time. At last, it discovers
that eternal undiminished happiness can be got only by dwelling on the
Reality of one's own Self, which is Bliss Itself.
 Yielding to despair worsens the problem
The life principle is like the grain covered up in the husk of delusion ( maya ),
as the rice is enveloped in the paddy. The delusion has to be removed; the
life principle has to be boiled and made soft and assimilated so that it might
add to health and strength. The softened rice can be compared to the
Supreme Soul. The mind has to be used for this process. It has to be fixed in
truth and the everlasting. To remove the husk of delusion, discrimination is an
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 58Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 12 - Tolerance
 instrument. Develop the power of discrimination and find out which is
permanent and which is not, which is beneficial and which is not. Even in
selecting a guru, use your discrimination. Not all clouds are rain-bearing. A
real teacher will be able to attract seekers from afar merely by his
personality. He need not be talked about in glowing terms; his presence will
be felt and aspirants will hurry toward him like bees toward a lotus in full
bloom. Seek the light always; be full of confidence and zest. Do not yield to
despair, for it can never produce results. It only worsens the problem, for it
darkens the intellect and plunges you in doubt. You must take up the path of
spiritual practice very enthusiastically. Half-hearted, halting steps will not
yield fruit. It is like cleaning a slushy area by a stream of water. If the current
of the stream is slow, the slush cannot be cleared. The stream must flow full
and fast, driving everything before it, so that the slush might be scoured
clean.
 Liberation can be achieved by subtle means
I shall talk to you of these first steps only, for they are the most important for
spiritual aspirants, and you all are all or are bound to be spiritual aspirants.
"Moksha lies in the sukshma ," they say - "Liberation can be achieved by
subtle means." Treat the others in the same way as you would like them to
treat you. Never brood over the past. When grief overpowers you, do not
recollect similar incidents in your past experience and add to the sum of your
grief; recollect, rather, incidents when grief did not knock at your door but
you were happy instead. Draw consolation and strength from such memories
and raise yourself above the surging waters of sorrow. Women are called
"weak" because they yield to anger and sorrow much more easily than men,
so I would ask them to take extra pains to overcome these two. Repetition of
the Name is the best antidote for this, and if only men and women would take
it up, the Lord would come to their rescue. That will instill the faith that
everything is God's Will and teach that you have no right to exult or despair.
When you go to a doctor, you must take the prescribed medicine and follow
the advice and instructions. There is no use blaming the doctor if you default.
How can the doctor cure you if you do not drink the mixture or stick to the
restrictions imposed or regulate your diet according to the advice? Do as I
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 59Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 12 - Tolerance
 say, follow My advice, and then watch the result. It is a sign of foolishness to
brood over mishaps and mistakes once committed and punish oneself for
them by refusing to take food. It is a childish way of correction. What is the
good of ill-treating the body for the sake of correcting the mind? Even if you
cannot love others, do not hate them or feel envy toward them. Do not
misunderstand their motives and scandalise them; if you only knew, their
motives might be as noble as yours or their action might be due to ignorance,
rather than wickedness or mischief. Pardon the other man's faults but deal
harshly with your own. The holy culture of this ancient land has been spoilt by
just one impurity: intolerance of another's success, prosperity, or progress. If
you cannot help another, at least avoid doing them harm or causing them
pain. That itself is a great service. What right have you to find fault with
another or to talk evil of him? When you say that nothing can ever happen on
earth without His Will, why get annoyed or angry? Your duty is to cleanse
yourself and engage in your own inner purification. That endeavour will bring
you the cooperation of all good men, and you will find strength and joy
welling up within you.
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 60Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 13 - Bliss Through Dedication
 13. Bliss Through Dedication
Date: 01 September 1958  / Location:  Rajamundry
 
Today is indeed a day of joy, since we have met here to share love (prema).
The joy is marred to some extent by the want of accommodation in this Hall
and the suffering all of you are put to. I feel it is not proper to keep you long
in this physical torment while I have comparative comfort on this less
crowded platform. That explains partly why you are restless and agitated, an
attitude quite different from what you should have on such occasions. The
same group of people, you will have observed, differs in its reactions and
behaviour when it is in a marriage pandal, a cinema hall, an exhibition
enclosure, a temple, or a football match. They are moved by totally different
impulses in these various places. In a gathering devoted to the needs of the
spirit, what is expected is eager attention, quiet calm, and reverential,
prayerful silence. Here, obviously, only the eye and the ear need function; the
tongue has no business to wag. I have come to share with you the gift of
prema that I have brought, but you seem to be satisfied with the confusion
that you already live in!
 The unhealthy are to be nursed back to health
Now, that is very much better. It is the silence that is wanted in all gatherings
where deeper spiritual disciplines are talked about. Of course, everywhere
and every time, it is best you curb your tongue; that is the very first exercise
that I prescribe for spiritual progress. What I have to say now is not for those
who are endowed with devotion, for they know the path and are already
marching on: nor for those who have no spring of devotion in them, for
speaking to them is a sheer waste of time. It is for the wavering, the
unsteady, the hesitant, who are conscious of the Higher Power and are feebly
desirous of contacting it, for they are either ignorant of the technique or
afraid of the consequences. It is for such half-apathetic devotees that I talk.
Medicine is useless for the dead as well as the sturdy. The unhealthy,
hovering between death and survival - these are to be nursed back to
strength. I would like you first to learn the art of so living in the midst of
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 61Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 13 - Bliss Through Dedication
 people so that you do not grieve nor make others grieve. Learn to make the
best life this chance offers to you to sublimate your instincts, impulses, and
impressions left on the mind by past actions (vasanas) and rise higher and
higher in the moral and spiritual plane. Make the best out of opportunities like
this, and derive bliss (ananda) from every hour, garnering all the profit you
can. This town is holy, so there are many metaphysical institutions; many
pious men visit it and give valuable advice. I am glad the Malayalaswami of
Yerpedu is now here for the four months of ascetic observance. It is a good
chance for you to learn from him the teachings of the sages of ancient times.
I am sure he will spread good thoughts and good impulses promoting your
spiritual advance.
 Become conscious of your kinship with God
This is not devotion, this holding a garland in the hand and indulging in paltry
conversation in holy places. I do not want nor do I appreciate anyone bringing
flowers and fruits into My presence. Bring Me the fragrant flower of a pure
heart and the fruit of a spiritual-discipline-mellowed mind - that is what I like
most, not these things available outside yourselves for so much of cash,
without any effort that elevates the mind. To get a taste for that kind of effort,
you must keep the company of great and good men and take delight in good
thoughts. By whatever means available, increase the stock of your bliss
(ananda) and improve the quality of discrimination and try to store as much
of these two as possible, so that you can draw upon the stock whenever the
need arises. The chief source of ananda is dedication to God; nothing else can
give that genuine and lasting joy. Become conscious of your kinship with the
Lord. That kinship is not a mere fancy or a faked theory. It has come down
since ages, from the beginning of time itself. It will persist till the very end of
time, or, in other words, till the end of time as far as you are concerned. The
Godavari river carries all the waters of all the tributary streams relentlessly to
the sea. The rain falls on the mountains; as streams it flows in the plains, and
the full Godavari rushes through the delta. So too, the individual is born in the
path of righteousness, journeys through path of action, and rushes through
path of sages to reach path of Supreme Reality. The paths of action and
sages are discovered by the organs of perception. Keep them
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 62Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 13 - Bliss Through Dedication
 uncontaminated by demonic qualities and watch vigilantly lest they slip back.
The sensory organs drag you into the tangle of nature itself. The cow eats
grass and drinks gruel, but out of these it creates sweet sustaining milk; so
too, let the experiences that are gathered by your senses help in the
production of the sweetness of kindness, the purity of devotion, and the
sustenance of peace (santhi ).
 Do not worry about others and their faults
There is in everyone a spark of truth; no one can live without that spark.
There is in everyone a flame of love; life becomes a dark void without it. That
spark, that flame, is God, for He is the source of all Truth and all Love. One
seeks truth; one seeks to know the reality because one's very nature is
derived from God, who is Truth. One seeks Love, to give it and share it, for
one's nature is of God and God is Love. Like the paddy seed, which contains
rice, the husk is the delusion (maya) that covers the seed within; the rice is
the individual soul, and the essence of the rice, the sustaining element, the
food, that is the Supreme Atma . So, develop inner vision; do not worry about
others and their faults. Do a little examination of the Self. Study the
Upanishads and spiritual texts - they might help you a little. Remember, only
a little help. They are but maps and sign posts. You must put them into
practice; act and experience. Meditate on the truth, and you will find that you
are but a sparkling bubble upon the waters - born on water, living for a brief
moment on water, and dying upon its breast, merging in it. You owe your
birth to God: you subsist on God and you merge in God. Every living thing has
to reach that consummation; why, every non-living thing too. So do it now;
take the first step. Purify the heart, sharpen the intellect, or at least begin the
recital of the name of the Lord. That will give you all the rest in due time.
When one plants a mango seed, one is not sure of living to eat the fruit, but
that is beside the point. To plant, to nourish, to guard, to grow, that is the
duty; the rest is His look out. That is the real renunciation of the fruits of
action.
 Holy things can be cognised only by holy seekers
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 63Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 13 - Bliss Through Dedication
 Above all, cultivate love (prema ) toward all. That will destroy envy, anger,
and hatred. God (Rama) and desire (kama) cannot coexist in the same heart.
Trust begets trust, love begets love. When I am talking to you with so much
prema , you cannot develop any hatred toward Me! Prema makes the whole
world kin. It is the greatest instrument of concord. The farmer plants the
seedling and watches over it with great care; he removes the weeds; he
destroys the pests; he lets in water as and when necessary; he spreads
manure; and he awaits the day when he can reap the harvest and fill his
granary. So too, you must nourish prema and pluck out the weeds of hatred
and envy. Wear red glasses, and all things appear red. Wear the glasses of
prema , and all will appear lovable and good. Reference was made here to
service of the poor; the eye of prema will see all as God (Narayana); not only
the poor but the rich also. The rich too need sympathy. You must pity the
rich, for they have so few chances of developing the attitude of renunciation!
See all as embodiments of Lord Narayana (Narayanaswarupa ), and worship
all with the flower of prema . Even My nature can be understood by you only
when you wear the glasses of holiness; holy things can be cognised only by
the holy seeker. You get what you search for; you see what your eyes crave
for. The doctor is found where patients gather; the surgeon stays in the
operation ward. So too, the Lord is ever with the suffering and the struggling.
Whenever people cry out in agony: "Oh God," there, God will be.
 To supplement spiritual discipline, lead a regulated life
The credentials of one doctor can be examined and judged only by another
doctor; the patient has to believe and carry out the doctor's instructions if he
desires to improve. He can give his judgement on the doctor only after the
course of treatment is finished. Unless he obeyed the orders of the doctor
strictly and to the very letter, he has no authority to pronounce judgement.
So what can you now speak about Me? Follow My prescription! Naturally, it
will be a different one for every one of you; it will depend upon the nature,
the age, the virulence of the disease, and the treatment you have already
undergone to alleviate it. Adhere also to the dietary and other regulations
that the doctor recommends. That is to say, it is not merely spiritual exercises
like repetition of holy Name, meditation, remembering the Name of God, etc.,
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 64Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 13 - Bliss Through Dedication
 that will have to be done, but in order to supplement the effect of these, you
have to lead a regulated life, a life conducive to good thoughts, with virtuous
(sathwic) food and noble (sathwic) pursuits. Until you try out My prescription
fully and sincerely, it is best you keep quiet. You do not know even a pebble;
how can you evaluate a peak? You may be "unafraid", you may not fear
anything else, but you have to fear Truth. There is nothing as awe-inspiring as
Truth; your Truth, for example, for your Truth is the Truth of the Universe.
Today, you may feel you have no need of the Lord, but when the pangs of
hunger gnaw, you start pining for food. Therefore, wash your hearts with
tears of joy so that the Lord might install Himself therein. A zamindar may
own all the fields up to the very horizon on all sides, but he will deign to sit
only on a patch that is clean! In the same way, when the Lord chooses the
heart of a devotee, it does not mean that all other hearts are not His. They
are not clean, that is all He means. He is everywhere, everything is His, His
gaze is on all. If God was not all this how could they shine, or exist even as
much as they do now? Therefore, have full faith in God and in yourselves.
Engage always in good deeds, beneficial activities; speak the truth, do not
inflict pain by word or deed or even thought. That is the way to gain peace
(santhi); that is the highest gain that you can earn in this life.
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 65Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 14 - The Wise Farmer
 14. The Wise Farmer
Date: 02 September 1958  / Location:  Mirthipadu
 
Today, I am really full of joy, for I have before Me people who are engaged in
hardy toil and who sacrifice their personal comforts in order to make others
happy. What the world needs is work done in that spirit. Everyone has divinity
embedded in them, as well as Truth and sweetness. Only, one does not know
how to manifest that Divinity, how to realise that Truth, how to taste that
sweetness. So, one carries the twin burdens of joy and grief tied to the ends
of a single pole slung across his shoulders. Courage is the tonic for getting
both physical as well as mental health and strength. Give up doubt,
hesitation, and fear. Do not give any chance for these to strike root in your
mind. People, by means of the inner divine strength, with which they are
equipped, can achieve anything; they can even become Madhava (God). To
help you to give up fear and doubt, keep the Name of the Lord always on your
tongue and in your mind. Dwell on the endless forms of the Lord, His limitless
Glory, while you repeat the Name. Attach yourself to Him; then your
attachment for these temporary objects will fall off; or at least, you will start
seeing them in their proper proportion as having only relative reality. When
the tiny little ego assumes enormous importance, it causes all this bother!
That is the root of all the travail.
 Ramanama endows you with spiritual power
In your heart, there is the Atma-rama , the Rama that confers eternal joy. So
repeat the name Rama - the Sun that can make the lotus in the heart bloom.
Rama is not the son of Emperor Dasaratha but of the ruler of the ten senses
(dasendriyas ). The recital of Rama's Name must become as automatic as
breathing, as frequent and as essential. Rama has in it the seed letters of
both the Siva mantra and the Narayana mantra, for it is composed of the
second letters of both: Na-ra-yana and Na-mah-sivaya . This name is
acceptable, therefore, to all sects. It also endows you with power and all the
spiritual capital you need. Real bliss ( ananda ) can be won only by means of
the transformation of the impulses that agitate the mind. It is not to be found
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 66Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 14 - The Wise Farmer
 in wealth. You think that the rich man is happy; ask Me, and I shall reveal to
you that they are full of grief, for they come to Me in large numbers for relief.
They have no peace ( santhi ) at all. A strong physique does not by itself give
peace; nor does scholarship, or asceticism or rituals. Only constant dwelling
with the Name of the Lord gives unshakable peace, unaffected by the ups and
downs of life. It makes man a hero. Sai Baba was till today a formless Name
to you, but now it has come with Form and you can keep the Form in your
mind. So too, the Name Rama has a form, and you should picture the form
also when you repeat the Name; then the name becomes concrete and
remembrance of the Name is easier. Live always in the presence of that Form-
filled name. Then life becomes one continuous worship of the Lord.
 Do your tasks as dedicated to the Lord
Really speaking, you agriculturists are holy souls, for you bend under the
weight of the service you do and, with hands raised in prayer, you toil night
and day converting dust and dirt into the nourishing harvest of grain for all
men to feed upon. This task is holy and the product of your efforts is also
sacred. Why cannot this task be made more fruitful by the cultivation of
virtues also? That is the real harvest that pleases the Lord and sustains the
world. Worry and grief there will always be of one type or other, in the past,
present, and future, while walking, dreaming, and sleeping. But place faith in
the Lord and do your tasks as dedicated to Him, and they both will vanish.
 Do your duties with God's Name on your lips
Narada one day boasted before Vishnu that no devotee could excel him; but
this boast was against the very first qualification of a devotee: freedom from
egoism. So Vishnu spoke of a farmer who was tilling his little plot of land as a
greater devotee and recommended that Narada should visit him and learn
"the art of devotion" from him. Narada felt badly humiliated; but he
proceeded to the village indicated, in great chagrin. He found the farmer
engrossed in his round of duties on the field, in the cattle shed and at home.
In spite of the most vigilant watch, he could not hear him speak the name of
the Lord more than thrice a day; once when he woke up from bed, another
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 67Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 14 - The Wise Farmer
 time when he took his midday meal, and the last when he retired for the
night. Narada was naturally incensed that he was deemed inferior to this
poor, pale specimen of a devotee. He, Narada, was always singing
melodiously of the divine sport of the Lord and spreading everywhere the
message of devotional singing of the Lord's name, and here was a horny-
handed son of the soil who remembered the Lord only three times a day,
whom Vishnu judged superior to him. Narada hurried to heaven, his face
flushed with anger and ignominy, but Vishnu only laughed at his plight. He
gave him a pot full to the brim with water and asked him to carry it on his
head and go round a certain course without spilling even a drop. Narada did
so, but when asked how often he had remembered the Name of the Lord, he
admitted that in his anxiety to walk without shaking the pot and spilling the
water, he had forgotten the Name completely! Vishnu told him that the
farmer who was carrying on his head more precious and more spillable
burdens than a pot of water and who had to be careful not to take any false
step must perforce be admired for remembering the Lord at least three times
a day! Therefore, it will be a great gain if you remember the Lord with
thankfulness at least thrice or even twice a day; that will give you great
peace. Do not give up your worldly duties, but do them with the name of God
on your lips, inviting the Grace of God on your heads. Do not involve
yourselves in the affairs of your neighbours or others to the extent that you
get so entangled you cannot extricate yourselves. Spend your time in the
contemplation of the beauties of nature, which are spread out before you in
earth and sky - green expanses of the crops you have raised, cool breezes
that waft contentment and joy, the panorama of coloured clouds, the music of
the birds. Sing the glories of God as you walk along the bunds of the fields
and the banks of the canals. Do not talk hatefully in the midst of all this
evidence of love, do not get angry in these placid surroundings; do not
disturb the sky with your shouts and curses, do not pollute the air with
vengeful boasts.
 Purify your conduct, cleanse your behaviour
The seedling wants water and manure to grow and yield rich harvest. The tiny
sapling of spiritual yearning for liberation from bondage also needs these two.
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 68Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 14 - The Wise Farmer
 That is the real cultivation that you must undertake. That is the mark of the
wise farmer.. More than all, set right your habits, purify your conduct, and
cleanse your behaviour. One bad habit that has taken deep root in this area is
the smoking of tobacco, an evil that is fast becoming universal. It destroys
health, happiness, energy, and even charm. Smoke will not quench your thirst
or fill your hungry stomach. It disfigures your face and denigrates your lungs.
It debilitates you and makes you diseased. Control yourself. Do not yield to
the snares of friends or society or what is miscalled social convention and
become a prey to this and other bad habits. The body is the temple of the
Lord; keep it in good and strong condition. It is damaged by food and drink of
the rajasic (e.g. anger, hatred, greed) and thamasic (e.g. sloth, sleep,
lethargy, inactivity) types and also by rajasic and thamasic behaviour. When
you get violent and angry with anyone, quietly repeat the name of the Lord to
overcome it or drink a glass of cold water or spread your bed and lie down
until the fit of fury passes. While angry, you abuse another and they do the
same; and tempers rise, heat is generated, and lasting injury is done. Five
minutes of anger damages the relationship for five generations, remember.
This skeletal cage or body ( asthipanjaram ) is the Hasthinapuram, where we
have the blind king, Dhritharashtra, the symbol of ignorance, as well as
Yudhistira, the symbol of wisdom. Let the forces of Yudhistira win, with the
help of Sri Krishna. Let the tongue, accustomed to the bitterness of the
margosa fruit of worldly triumphs and disasters, taste the sweet honey of
remembering the Lord's Name. Experiment with this for a time and you will
be surprised at the result. You can feel the vast improvement in peace and
stability in you and around you. Learn this easy lesson, get immersed in joy,
and let others also share that joy with you. This is Message I leave with you.
 
Remember always that it is easy to do what is pleasant, but it is difficult to
be engaged in what is beneficial. Not all that is pleasant is profitable.
Success comes to those who give up the path strewn with roses and brave
the hammer blows and sword thrusts of the path fraught with danger. 
- Sri Sathya Sai Baba
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 69Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 14 - The Wise Farmer
  
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 70Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 15 - Be Heroes, Not Zeros
 15. Be Heroes, Not Zeros
Date: 03 September 1958  / Location:  Peddhapuram
 
I am happy that I could converse now with so many of you at the same time.
Yesterday and the day before, I had the same happy experience, and
thousands partook the joy from the words that were spoken. Now the whole
world is very agitated; it is full of discontent and anxiety, fear and petty
faction and hatred. In order to calm and quieten it and remove the discontent
and anxiety, you must have enthusiasm and courage. When defeat and
disappointment stare you in the face, you must not give way to weakness or
despondency. Never condemn yourselves as inferior or useless; analyse the
defeat and find out the reasons in order to avoid it the next time. You should
have muscles of iron and nerves of steel. Then your resolution will itself
generate the necessary confidence, and that will win over opposition. For the
crop of life, courage and confidence are the best manure as well as the best
insecticides. Be like lions in the spiritual field, rule over the forest of the
senses and roam fearlessly with full faith in victory. Be heroes, not zeros; for
man (manava) is of the nature of God (Madhava); he is the imperishable
eternal Atma ! Just as rain falling in various parts of the world flows through a
thousand channels and reaches the ocean at last, so too, creeds, rituals,
religions, and theologies, all derived from man's yearning for the vast
inscrutable beyond, flow in a thousand different forms, fertilising many fields,
cooling many communities, refreshing tired people in many ways and at last
reach the Ocean of Bliss.
 Proper atmosphere is essential for spiritual exercises
The Lord is all Love, so he can be seen only through Love. The moon has to
be seen only through its own light - no other light can illumine the moon. In
the night of utter delusion, the Lord can be seen only by the light that He
himself is, namely, the light of pure love (prema). He is Truth and Eternal, so
He is beyond the categories of falsity and change. Drop the delusion that you
have become old or diseased, or that you have become weak and debilitated.
Some people begin to count the years and grieve over advancing age and
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 71Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 15 - Be Heroes, Not Zeros
 shudder like cowards afraid of death. But remember, elation is Heaven,
despondency is Hell. Have always some work to do, and do it so well that you
get joy. Delusion is the dust that settles upon the glass of the chimney of the
lantern and dims the light. The attachment to sensual objects and to the
pleasure they give is the soot that sticks to the inside of the chimney; that
also dims the light. Clean the chimney by repetition of the Name every day,
and the flame will shine for you and others. Also, have good activities and
good companionship. That will help very much in spiritual discipline; proper
atmosphere is very essential for the aspirant. That is why spiritual seekers
used to move out and dwell in the hermitages maintained by sages in the
past. In the hermitages, the spiritual aspirants had the unique chance of
being immersed in good thoughts, good activities, and good company. It is
like keeping a pot of water immersed in water; the water in the pot will then
not be lost through evaporation. But if the pot of water is kept in the open so
that the wind plays upon it and the sun shines on it, very soon the pot
becomes empty. Be careful, therefore, that the success you have won in the
promotion of virtue, in the conquest of baneful habits, and in the assumption
of regular disciplines are not frittered away by trite company, loose talk,
cynical criticism, or lackadaisical effort.
 Draw upon God's Grace for all your needs
The Goddess of Victory smiles only on the heroic, those who make lions of
themselves, hardy, brave, and adventurous warriors. If you secure the Grace
of God, you are reinforced with so much strength that you can carry out even
the most difficult tasks. So get the Lord on your side and draw upon His Grace
for all your needs. The treasure that is unmistakably precious is the quality of
equanimity, unruffledness. Practise this and make it your natural reaction.
Why be put out when you see wrong? Why be attracted when you see evil?
Remember, evil has in it the potentiality to become good; good has in it the
liability to turn evil. There is no fire without a wisp of smoke; there is no
smoke without a spark of fire. No one is fully wicked or fully infallible. Take
the world as it is; never expect it to conform to your needs or standards. The
illusory quality (maya) envelops the good with the blemish of the bad; it
makes the evil glitter with the shine of the good. Discriminate to the best of
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 72Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 15 - Be Heroes, Not Zeros
 your capacity, and develop your capacity to discriminate. Struggle to win,
that is the best that you can do; few can say, 'I have won.' Your conscience
knows the real source of joy. It will prod you toward the right path; your
business is to take it as "guide" and not disobey it every time it contradicts
your whim or fancy.
 India has a rich mine of spirituality
There were two parrots on a tree, twins to be more precise. A hunter trapped
them and sold them, one to a low, cruel butcher and the other to a sage who
was running an ashram to teach the Vedas . After a few years, he was
surprised to find that one bird swore very foully, while the other recited the
divine plays of the Lord in a sweet musical tone, which captivated the
listeners. Such is the effect of the environment. So, seek and secure good
company. If truth is given up and man slides down the path of falsehood,
then, as Appa Rao said just now, starvation and disease (kshama) will
descend on the earth instead of well-being (kshema), famine will stalk the
land instead of the plenty that characterised it formerly. Appa Rao said that in
Hindustan, there have been may manifestations of the Lord. That is true, for
teachers have to be present where schools are and where children eager to
learn are found. You cannot have the teachers in one place, the school in
another; the black board in one place, the bell in another. There are mica
mines near Gudur; you cannot ask why they are not found near Peddapuram.
It is so, that is all. So too, in India, there is a rich mine of spirituality, so
engineers have to come here to operate it, extract it, and prepare it for use.
That is why more manifestations of the Lord appear here. The atmosphere
here is also conducive to the practical application of new modes and methods
of extraction and use for the benefit of all humanity.
 I am you and you are all I
Bha-ratha means the land of those who have attachment (rathi) toward
Bhagavan (bha), that is to say, the Lord. The Lord too has to come in human
form and move about among people, so that He could be listened to,
contacted, loved, revered, and obeyed. He has to speak the language of
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 73Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 15 - Be Heroes, Not Zeros
 humans and behave like human beings, as a member of the species.
Otherwise, He would be either negated and neglected or feared and avoided.
The Avatar (divine Advent) has to lift humanity and put it into the crucible in
order to remove the slag and inferior metals that have destroyed its sterling
worth. When little boys turn the tap without knowing its mechanism, water
badly drenches them by scattering on them circular showers; thus is man
drenched in grief because he does not know how to turn and get an even
flow. If the hero (nayaka) is good, the drama (nataka) will be grand; if the
hero is a flop, the drama will be a disaster. The leaders of the people must
have faith in their own Atma and the confidence born of that; then they can
lead others; then they will not lead them astray, for they will feel kinship with
the basic Atma in all. Appa Rao spoke of Me. My Mystery can be known only
by traversing My path, which I have here laid down. Understand yourself, and
that will reveal Me to you, for I am you and you are all I. There is no need to
retire into a forest or a cave to know your inner Truth and to conquer your
lower nature. As a matter of fact, you have no chance to exercise your anger
there, so victory achieved there may not be lasting or genuine. Win the battle
of life; be in the world but yet be away from its tentacles. That is the victory
for which you deserve congratulations.
 
Spread joy at all times. Do not pour into others' ears your tales of woe and
worry; carry a smile on your face so that everyone who sees you can catch
that exhilaration. When you tell others of your success, your purpose is to
create envy in them. You must not only love others; you must be so good
that others too may love you. Try to console, encourage, strengthen, and
enlighten those who are miserable, downhearted, weak, or ill-informed. Get
yourselves equipped for this role. 
- Sri Sathya Sai Baba
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 74Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 16 - Training
 16. Training
Date: 09 September 1958  / Location:  Venkatagiri
 
UNTIL about an hour ago, the organisers of this function were nervous that I
might not come. They had reconciled themselves to the disappointment in
store and were feverishly engaged in making alternative arrangements, for
they had heard that the Godavari was in high floods and that I was at
Rajahmundry. So they feared that I might not be able to cross the floods and
come south in time for this engagement. From the fact that I had permitted
them to announce My arrival for the function, they could well have inferred
that the floods would subside and that I would be in their midst, for, once My
word goes forth, it must happen accordingly. Do not doubt it. The furious
waves calmed before Rama; the floods went down in time for Me. We left
Chebrole last night at 11 p.m. and reached Nuzvid at about dawn. From there
we motored throughout the day, without as much as a halt on the way, not
slowing down even when the Kumararaja and others accosted Me near the
bridge on the outskirts of this town, for I was determined to be here at 5 p.m.
as promised. Let me reveal to you that the organisers were caught a little
unawares; they were confused by rumour that I was held up and that I could
not be reached by post or telegram or telephone. They asked Me for some
time, about two hours they said, for hastening with the arrangements!  
Believe Me, nothing can hamper Me; My will must prevail. Those who spread
stories that I was held up by the floods were ignorant of my Reality. Nothing
can hold Me up or agitate Me or cast a shadow on Me come in this Human
Form; be certain of that. Not even a hair can be touched by forces of calumny
or distrust or ignorance. My Resolve must prevail; My task must be
accomplished. My mission will succeed. I have come to illumine the
human heart with the Light Divine and to rid man of the delusion
that drags him away from the path of peace ( santhi ), the
perfect equanimity born of realisation.  
  Reason for naming persons with God's Names 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 75Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 16 - Training
 This School is associated with the late brother of the Raja Saheb, a person
who dwelt on My name even in the last moments of his life, and that was why
I agreed to inaugurate it. I find that his name, which is a long compound of a
number of fine appellations of God, each redolent with divine Glory, has been
shortened into a string of single letters, which has no fragrance, flavour, or
significance. This is not proper. Why deprive a name of its halo by amputating
it or wiping out all its aura? This distorted list of letters that you have
substituted for his full name, probably for the sake of greater convenience,
seems to Me even more complicated than the original name, which, though
long, reminds one of the magnificence and splendour of the Lord. That is why
such names were recommended for men and women in the spiritual
scriptures, so that whenever they are mentioned, some one picture of the
Lord, sweet and splendid, might appear before the mind's eye. It is indeed
good that the girls of this town have now a high school. I appreciate the
efforts of all of you to start it, and I see that the building and the equipment
are quite satisfactory. I bless that the girls studying here as well as
everywhere else (for all schools are Mine, whether I inaugurate them
personally or not) may cultivate faith in righteousness ( dharma ) and have
sympathy toward all. 
  Students must be trained in ancient disciplines 
Bharath has to take up once again the role of the teacher for the whole of
humanity, so every boy and girl of the land must attain unblemished
character and lead a life of strict moral discipline. Bharath (India) is a word
derived from Bhagavan and rathah (constant attachment to the Lord), and
the word connotes a people who are dedicated to the service and uplift of the
Divine in each. So, along with the schooling that you get under present
conditions in such institutions, a schooling that helps some of you to earn a
living and that gives all of you a certain "polish" and "glitter", you must also
undergo training in the ancient discipline that tames the instincts, controls
the impulses, and assures steadiness of character. These things are
necessary for your own sake, not to speak of the role Bharatha has to play.
Training ( sikshana ) is a process in which the teacher and the taught
cooperate. It must be a pleasant experience for both, a useful and heartening
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 76Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 16 - Training
 endeavour. Kshana means "a second", and I want that you must learn a good
lesson every second of your school life. For example, when the teacher enters
the classroom, children should salute the teacher; that is a lesson in humility,
in respecting age and scholarship, in gratitude for service rendered. Teachers
too should decide to deserve the salutation of the children entrusted to their
care by sincere work and selfless service. The student should not respect the
teacher through fear but be moved more by love. The teacher should avoid all
methods that frighten or terrorise. Education is a slow process like the
unfolding of a flower, the fragrance becoming deeper and more perceptible
with the silent blossoming, petal by petal, of the entire flower. 
  Example, not precept, is the best teaching aid 
The unfolding will be helped if the teacher is a fine example of discrimination,
humility, and clear-sightedness, rather than a person engaged in the task of
mere repetitive teaching and coaching for examinations. Example, not
precept, is the best teaching aid. The value of character has to be
emphasised here, for this is a school for girls, and traits like modesty and
devotion to God are the real jewels for womankind. Women preserve the
traditional values of our culture and keep the nation on an even keel. If they
fail, it would be famine, not prosperity, believe Me. So, base all educational
efforts on building up the character of the students, and then you can
confidently think of raising on it the super-structure of curricula, etc. Pupils
must know the secret of a happy life and of happy cooperation with other
members of the community. There are duties to oneself, one's family, and
one's society, which must be carried out intelligently and joyfully. Then only
can life be harmonious and fruitful. I declare that this task of renovating and
recasting education is a part of My Mission , and before long you will find Me
engaged in it and chastising those who simply talk loud and long of
reconstruction and the preservation of spiritual values. Girls are the makers of
the homes of this land, so this school is a very basic institution, essential for
this town. Woman is honoured in this land as the Lakshmi of the home, as the
companion on the pilgrimage toward God and self-realisation, and as the
mistress of the house. 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 77Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 16 - Training
   Girls should dread sliding into moral error 
If the women of a country are happy, healthy, and holy, the men of that
country will be hardy, honest, and happy. Thyagaraja has sung that even the
strongest of heroes are swayed by the wishes of women, so every woman has
a very crucial role to play in individual and social uplift. Therefore, I would not
burden girls with the study of the geographical minutiae of America, Australia,
or Germany. I would rather they knew the technique of mental calm, social
harmony, service, and economic contentment. Let them develop a dread of
falsehood, of sliding into moral error; that is more important than even the
development of the dread of God. Let the girls also know something of the joy
that service to those in distress can give, service without a thought of the
benefits that may follow from the sympathy shown. Let them learn to lay
aside the egoism that poisons the selfless service of even veterans in the
field, who go about extolling themselves as founders and promoters, for the
service of the poor and the maimed, of this institution and that. The joy of
selfless service is the act itself. The fruit of the selfless service is the removal
of egoism, not its multiplication. 
  Attitudes to be developed by children 
The students of this school will take up later the most glorious and the most
responsible role of Motherhood, so the teachers in schools for girls have a
great big task before them: the shaping of the future history of this country.
The mother is the pillar of the home, of society, of the nation, and so of
humanity itself. Mothers should know the secret of mental peace, of inner
silence, of spiritual courage, of contentment, which is the greatest wealth,
and of spiritual discipline, which gives lasting joy. The mother should teach
the children the value of remembering the Name of God and of mental and
physical cleanliness. She should be like the mother in the story told by
Vivekananda, who advised her son to call upon Krishna in the woods while
going to school alone and helpless. The father and the mother must
supplement at home the training given by the teacher at school. They must
acquaint themselves with the lesson the child receives at the school and see
that their conduct and advice do not conflict with what the child learns from
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 78Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 16 - Training
 the teacher whom he adores. Teachers and parents must see that children
learn certain good habits and attitudes during these formative years. What is
read from books must be contemplated upon, thought over in quietness,
reflected upon in silence. This is a very good exercise in intellectual
development and in the acquisition of mental peace. The instinct to quarrel
and fight over all misunderstandings must be regulated and sublimated.
Children should not enjoy the infliction of pain or be allowed to suffer physical
pain or mental anguish. They must have a sense of responsibility at least for
the safe custody and proper upkeep of their books. They must not take
delight in showing off their dress or ornaments or status or wealth before less
fortunate children of the school. They have to be taught sensible habits of
personal cleanliness and, more important than all, the habit of prayer at
regular hours. 
  Importance of prayer at home and school 
They may be encouraged to go to bed regularly every day at 9 p.m. and wake
up at 5 a.m. After washing the face and cleaning the eyes and teeth, they
may be induced to pray or even to meditate. Do not think that there is a time
enough for prayer later on in life, during old age perhaps. The time to lay the
foundation for the habit is now. At school too, the day's work should start with
prayer for five minutes, which should be taken seriously by one and all and
not reduced to the mere formality or farce that it has become in most
schools. The slightest sign of neglect shown by the school while arranging the
prayer sessions will react on the minds of the children, and they will see
through the humbug quickly. So treat the prayer as the very foundation of the
entire edifice of schooling. When the last bell of the day is rung, make the
pupils stand up in the class quietly and let them observe silence for a minute
or two and then disperse. There is nothing like silence to still the waves of
your heart. The teachers must tell the children inspiring tales of our saints
and heroes and plant the love for spiritual literature. If this school grows up
along these lines, then the money so generously offered and so gladly
devoted to the establishment of the school is well spent, and I am sure this
school will develop into a very useful institution in a short time. 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 79Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 16 - Training
  
Man can be happy with much less equipment than he seems to think
essential. When some article is with you for some little time, you feel it is
indispensable, and you do not know how to live without it. Like the silkworm,
you weave a cocoon for yourself out of your fancy. Do not allow costly habits
to grow, costly from the monetary as well as the spiritual point of the view.
Watch your likes and dislikes with vigilant eye and discard anything that
threatens to encumber your path. 
- Sri Sathya Sai Baba
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 80Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 17 - Qualities And Money
 17. Qualities And Money
Date: 14 December 1958  / Location:  Arakkonam, Tamil Nadu
 
I FIND that you have simply mentioned that Sri Sathya Sai Baba will be
present at the conference. You have not assigned Me any speech, so I can as
well be silent. But as far as I am concerned, there is no need for formality or
announcement. I am yours; you are mine. I do not await even an invitation;
our relationship is not external; it goes deeper into the realms of the spirit. I
am with you and in you, so I need no welcome or previous request. The Divine
Life Society endeavours to remind man of the Divine, which is his basic
reality. Divinity is inherent, immanent in every individual soul, and the
process of reminding man of that fact began with the very dawn of human
history. What has to be done to lead the Divine Life is just the removal of the
fog that hides the Truth and makes one imagine one is something else -
something inferior, evanescent, material, momentary. All are holy, pure, part
of eternity. But these things shine in each in proportion to their spiritual
practices, just as bulbs spread illumination according to the wattage. There is
no body that is not sustained by the Absolute; there is no name that does not
indicate the Universal. All objects are suffused by that Principle; all names are
attributes of its Glory.
 Turn to the path of inner content and joy
Everyone must join this association, which harps on this fundamental fact and
feeds the craving for immortality deep-seated in humanity. We were told by
the secretary who read the report that the membership of the organisation is
open to all who pay "four annas" (former Indian coin equal to a quarter of a
rupee) a month. I would suggest that membership should be thrown open to
all who can contribute not four annas but four qualities (gunas) instead!
Those who have truth, righteousness, peace, and love (sathya , dharma ,
santhi , and prema) are eminently fitted for membership. Insist on qualities
(gunas), and do not look for money (annas). One always seeks happiness by
trying to satisfy one's desires. If a desire is fulfilled, one feels joy, and when it
is not, one feels grief. But the trouble is, desire is a bonfire that burns with
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 81Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 17 - Qualities And Money
 greater fury, asking for more fuel. One desire leads to ten, and one exhausts
oneself in trying to exhaust the demands of desire. One has to be turned back
from this path of never-ending desire to the path of inner content and joy.
That is the task of the Divine Life Society. One grieves because one has
developed attachment toward the unreal. One cultivates an unreasonable
affection for wealth, but one is prepared to sacrifice the riches in order to
save the lives of one's children, for attachment to children is stronger than to
the wealth that has been earned! One stoops so low as to neglect the children
when the choice is between survival and the children's welfare! But the bliss
that one gets when one dwells on the Atma , the source and spring of all joy,
is unbounded and imperishable. That is the real joy. The orange rind is not
very tasty, but it protects the fruit and preserves it. To get the sweetness of
the orange, you must peel and throw off the rind. Such is the fruit of the tree
of life; it is protected by a bitter rind, of course, but the wise man does not try
to eat the rind; he gives it the consideration due to it and proceeds to throw it
off; he then tastes the sweetness.
 Every Indian has to live the life taught by sages
In order that this wisdom may dawn on persons most in need of it, the elders
must set an example of discrimi nation and detachment. If they run after
sensory pleasures with feverish excitement, how can the younger generation
be blamed for their selfishness and greed? The elders must practise what
they preach and show how divine life can confer joy, mental poise,
contentment, and real happiness. They must spend at least some time every
day in the recital of the Lord's Name or in meditation on the Lord; then the
children will also imbibe that atmosphere and acquire the sure means of
gaining peace (santhi) for themselves. You say that there is nothing as sweet
as the name of the Lord, but you do not repeat it at all. You have spoilt the
road by neglect and wanton destruction, but you advise the children to walk
along it. They will discover the hoax; they will ask you to travel on the road
yourself and give them the lead. So the responsibility of the members of the
Divine Life Society here is very great. As a matter of fact, the responsibility of
any person who holds forth an ideal is great, for he has to attempt to reach it
himself while advising others to adopt it. That is why the responsibility of an
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 82Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 17 - Qualities And Money
 Indian is so great, for in this land have been born saints and sages who have
taught the world the highest truths of spiritual uplift; and anyone claiming to
be an Indian has to live the life taught by them in order to deserve that
ancestry and the admiration of aspirants all over the world.
 Physical hunger must first be appeased
Divine Life is based on the quality of calm serenity (sathwa guna), which must
be cultivated. This quality can be built only upon natural (sathwic) food, food
that promotes health, strength, lightness of spirit, and earnestness of
endeavour. There is no use distributing the juice of spirituality to underfed
and weak people; give rice juice first; make them strong enough to entertain
strong beliefs and contain strong ideals. Physical hunger must first be
appeased by simple pure (sathwic) food. Then, try to repeat the name of the
Lord, the name that appeals to you most. Do not treat the Name lightly;
respect it even if you hear it from the lips of a beggar who uses it to procure
aims. Though the person who utters it is bad or though his motive in uttering
it is bad, do not ill-treat the Name; for its purity can never be harmed. Thank
them for reminding you of the Lord and go your way. Above all, do not laugh
at and discourage those who call on the Lord. What right have you to
substitute misery where there was joy and doubt where there was faith? Love
(prema): practise that; develop that; spread that - and all the hatreds and
jealousies of today will disappear. That is the duty of the Divine Life Society,
here as well as elsewhere.
 
No one can liberate you, for no one has bound you. You hold on to the nettle
of worldly pleasure, and you weep for pain. The kite is pursued by crows as
long as it carries the fish in its beak; it twists and turns in the sky trying to
dodge the crows, who seek to snatch the fish. Tired at last, it drops the fish.
That moment it is free. So give up attachment to the senses, and grief and
worry can harass you no more. The kite sits on a tree, preening its wings,
enjoying its happiness. You too can be so happy, provided you drop the fish
you have in your beak. 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 83Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 17 - Qualities And Money
 
- Sri Sathya Sai Baba
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 84Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 18 - Education And Peace
 18. Education And Peace
Date: 20 December 1958  / Location:  Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala
 
The Governor, Dr. Ramakrishna Rao, spoke now so feelingly about the urgent
need to cultivate spiritual values. When economic progress is made without
modifying the spiritual background, then egoism, competition, and greed
bring the community to grief. Here in Thiruvananthapuram, there is no
forgetting the spiritual background. The temple of Padhmanabha dominates
the town as well as the daily life of the people, not only of this place but of
the entire State. Kerala is itself a holy land, and its holiness has increased by
the advent of Sankaracharya and his teachings. The land is very beautiful, as
I saw when I came from Coimbatore all the way to this capital city. The
scenery formed by the backwaters and the coconut groves stretching from
one end of the State to the other was like a vast painting by a great artist on
a huge canvas. The Lord enjoys these things as a painter; He appreciates His
own handiwork, standing before His own painting or sculpture. To see the
Lord's own loveliness in the lovely scenery around you requires not the outer
eye but the inward eye. If you develop that, walking over the land or voyaging
over the waters is itself a pilgrimage through holy land, giving you glimpses
of God in every speck of cloud or patch of green. But all this Divine Beauty
(Sundaram) must lead man to truth (sathyam), and all this truth to goodness
(mangalam). That is the natural path. The beauty of the Lord's handiwork
leads one on to the glory of the Lord; the picture makes you curious about the
Painter. The Lord, when His Truth is grasped, confers bliss, which is
auspiciousness itself.
 Kerala is ancient repository of spiritual wisdom
I found also that the people here are very hardworking and industrious. From
one end of the state to the other, people were busy on the roadside, in the
shops and fields, in the gardens and canals. Another thing that attracted the
attention of all those who were with Me was the stream of children hastening
to the schools, with cadjan leaves or slates or bags of books slung on their
shoulders, boys as well as girls. The percentage of literacy here is, I know, the
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 85Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 18 - Education And Peace
 highest in India. Besides every family has a number of highly educated men
and women. Thiruvananthapuram is the centre of many great educational
and cultural institutions. In spite of all the ancient traditions of spiritual
victory, all the granary of spiritual lore, all the activity, all the industry, all the
passion to get educated, and all the opportunities that are so gladly grasped,
I find here a great deal of unrest. No "inner peace" is prevalent here, where
one would expect to find it in large measure. Of course, as the saying goes,
"An aged tiger still has the stripes." Let Me tell you that the breath is still
there, but strength has gone from this ancient repository of spiritual wisdom,
which once taught the secret of equanimity and peace (santhi) to all.
Gramophone records are all made of the same material. So too are all hearts
of the same Supreme Consciousness. The grooves carved in them appear the
same in all the plates. The grooves carved upon the hearts by grief and joy
are also more or less the same. It is the needle that runs over the groove that
produces through the sound box and the amplifier good music or bad. The
needle is the mind, the mind that runs over the happiness and misery and
translates or exaggerates the response and makes you feel elated or
dejected. If the needle is sharp, the music is a pleasure to the ear. If it is blunt
or broken, the sound becomes a screeching torture.
 The education man must first secure
The mind is the wind that brings us the smell, foul or fragrant, of the world.
When the mind turns to the foul, it makes you disgusted; when it turns toward
the fragrant, you are made happy. The wind gathers the clouds from the four
quarters; similarly the mind brings into your consciousness the
disappointments of many hopes. Again, it is the mind that, like the wind,
scatters the clouds that darken it or make it feel lost in the night of doubt.
Control the mind and you remain unruffled. That is the secret of peace; that is
the education that one must first claim and secure. We find today that, the
person who is most highly educated is the very person who is most
discontented and unhappy. Then, what is the gain from all the study the
person has made of books and of men and things? To gain this equanimity,
you have to do not reading but systematic spiritual effort. Then, you can be
happy whether you are rich or poor, appreciated or rejected, prosperous or
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 86Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 18 - Education And Peace
 unlucky. That is an armour without which it is foolish to enter the arena of life.
If the arena is entered just for getting sensory joy, you are in for all kinds of
trouble. It is like sailing in a tiny boat on a storm-tossed sea without a rudder.
So, enter upon the path of spiritual discipline now itself.
 Meditation will teach the mind to be sharp
Each one of you has a great deal of concentration; you know the art, for every
task requires it and everyone benefits by it. The carpenter, the weaver, the
clerk, the boatman - all have it in a greater or lesser degree. Use it for this
task also: direct the mind toward its own working, examine it and train it to
restrict itself to good company, good thoughts, and good deeds. Practise
meditation on any Form of the Lord and repeat, with awareness of the
sweetness, any Name of the Lord. That will teach the mind to be sharp and
produce good music out of the joys, as well as the griefs that are incidental to
life. Like underground water, the Divine is there, in everyone, remember. The
Lord is the Indweller in all beings; He is All-pervading. He is the Soul (Atma) of
every being. He is in you as much as in everyone else. He is not more in a rich
being or bigger in a fat being; His spark illumines the cave of the heart of
every one. The sun shines equally on all; His Grace is falling equally on all. It
is only you that erect obstacles that prevent the rays of His Grace from
warming you. Do not blame the Lord for your ignorance or foolishness or
perversity. Just as underground water wells up in a gushy spring when a bore
is sunk down to that depth, by constant Ram Ram Ram Ram Ram , touch the
spring of Divinity, and one day it will gush out in cool plenty and bring
unending joy.
 Nothing can give unmixed joy
Life is a pilgrimage to God; the holy spot is there, afar! The road lies before
you, but unless you take the first step forward and follow that step with
others, how can you reach it? Start with courage, faith, joy, and steadiness.
You are bound to succeed. The mind and the intellect are two bullocks tied to
a cart, "the inner man". The bullocks are not used to the road of truth,
righteousness, peace, and love (sathya , dharma , santhi , and prema), so
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 87Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 18 - Education And Peace
 they drag the cart along the road familiar to them, namely, falsehood,
injustice, worry, and hatred. You have to train them to take the better road so
that they may not bring disaster to themselves, the cart they are yoked to,
and the men inside it. Your child gives you great joy by its play and prattle,
but when it interferes with your work or teases you when you are otherwise
engaged, you get very angry with it. It is a source of joy as well as grief.
There is nothing that can give unmixed joy. Even if there is, its loss brings
about sorrow. This is the very nature of things. So try to correct the very
source of joy and sorrow, the mind. Control it and train it to see the real
nature of the objective world, which attracts and repels you by turn. That is
the real fruit of education.
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 88Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 19 - The Moon And The Mind
 19. The Moon And The Mind
Date: 07 February 1959  / Location:  Prasanthi Nilayam  / Occasion:  Shivarathri
 
THERE are many different stories in the scriptures to explain the origin of the
Sivarathri (The Night of the Emergence of linga form of Siva) Festival. Some of
them were related now by the persons who spoke to you. Another story is
that this is the day on which Siva danced the cosmic dance in His Ecstasy,
with all the gods and sages taking part in the cosmic event. When He
consumed the death-dealing poison that emanated from the ocean of milk, in
response to the prayers of the worlds, which it threatened to destroy, the
heat of the fumes was well nigh unbearable, even for Him. So, it is said,
Ganga river was poured uninterruptedly on His matted locks - this is the
explanation for the abhisheka (ceremony of pouring consecrated water, oil,
milk, etc., on the idol), which is offered in all Siva temples for hours on end,
and in some places, uninterruptedly. But Siva was only partly relieved. So the
cool moon was placed on the head, which gave some relief. Then, Ganga was
placed on the matted locks. That was of great help. After this, Siva danced
the cosmic dance with all the gods. That is the story, but all this did not
happen on a particular day, so Sivarathri cannot be said to commemorate
that day. Some say that Siva was born on this day, as if Siva has birth and
death like any mortal! The story that a hunter sat on a bilva tree on the
lookout for animals to kill and, without intending any worship, unknowingly,
dropped the leaves of that tree, which happened to be a bilva, upon a lingam
beneath, and so attained salvation, explains only the importance of this day.
It does not explain the origin! Besides we have not only the great Sivarathri
(Mahasivarathri). We have a Sivarathri every month, dedicated to Siva
worship. Again, what is the significance of the rathri (night)?
 The close affinity between mind and the moon
Well, the night is dominated by the moon. The moon has 16 fractions, and
each day when it wanes, a fraction is reduced, until it is annihilated on new-
moon night. After that, each day a fraction is added, until it completes itself
on full moon night. The moon is the presiding deity of the mind. "Out of the
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 89Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 19 - The Moon And The Mind
 mind of the Godhead, the moon was born (Chandrama manaso jathah)."
There is a close affinity between the mind (manas) and the moon; both are
subject to decline and progress. The waning of the moon is the symbol for the
waning of the mind, for the mind has to be controlled, reduced, and finally
destroyed. All spiritual exercises is directed toward this end. The mind has to
be killed so that illusion (maya) may be rent asunder and the reality revealed.
Every day during the dark half of the month, the moon, and symbolically its
counterpart in man, the mind, wane, and a fraction is diminished; its power
declines. Finally, on the fourteenth night, there is just a wee bit left, that is all.
If a little extra effort is made that day by the spiritual aspirant, even that bit
can be wiped off and mastery of the mind completed. The fourteenth night of
the dark half is called Sivarathri , for that night should be spent in the
repetition of the Name of and meditation on Siva, without any other thought
either of food or sleep. Then success is assured. Once a year, on
Mahasivarathri night, a special spurt of spiritual activity is recommended, so
that what is the corpse (savam) can become God (Sivam) by the removal of
this dross called mind. This is the purpose of Sivarathri , so it is foolish and
even harmful deceit to imagine that "keeping awake" is the essential thing in
its observance. People try to escape sleep on this night by playing cards,
attending non-stop cinema shows, or watching plays or dramas. That is not
the spiritual exercise that should be intensified on Sivarathri . That is a
travesty of the vow of "sleeplessness". It vulgarises you and encourages evil
and sloth, wickedness, and hypocrisy.
 Symbolic meaning of words used in scriptures
On Sivarathri , the mind must become reduced into nothing. Lingam means
that in which this world attains nothingness, that into which this world goes.
Examine the linga ; the three primordial qualities (gunas) are represented by
the three-tiered platform; the lingam above symbolises the goal of life.
Lingam means "symbol", the symbol of creation, the result of the activity of
the three qualities and of the Brahman (Supreme Reality), which permeates
and gives it meaning and value. When you worship the lingam , do so with
faith in this symbolic significance. Every word, every Form used in the
spiritual texts has a symbolic meaning, which gives it value. The word
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 90Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 19 - The Moon And The Mind
 prapancha , which you use so freely to indicate this "created world", means,
"that which is composed of the pancha-bhuthas - the five elements of earth,
fire, water, wind, and ether." Take the word hrdayam used for "the heart". It
means hridi (in the heart) ayam (He). That is to say, it means not the organ
that pumps blood to all parts or the body but the seat of God, the altar where
Siva is installed, the niche where the lamp of wisdom is lit. Again, Siva does
not ride on an animal called, in human language, a "bull!" The bull is only a
symbol of dharma , standing on the four legs of truth, righteousness, peace,
and love (sathya , dharma , santhi , and prema).
 Lingam is the symbolic form of the Godhead
The three eyes of Siva are the eyes that reveal the past, present, and future.
Siva alone has all three. The elephant skin that forms His cloak is just a
symbol for the elemental bestial primitive traits that His Grace destroys. He
makes them powerless and harmless; in fact, he tears them to pieces, skins
them, so to say, and makes them ineffective. His four Faces symbolise peace,
fierceness, auspiciousness, and determination. In this way, realise, while
worshipping the lingam , the inner sense of the many attributes of Siva.
Meditate thus on Siva this day, so that you may get rid of the last lingering
vestiges of delusion. Just as Om is the verbal symbol of God, the lingam is the
symbolic form of the Godhead. It is just a form. Everything is delusion (maya),
and to grasp it, you must deal with delusion. Otherwise you cannot realise the
deluding power. God is as immanent in the Universe as life is immanent in the
egg. The chicken is in every part of the egg; so too, God is in every part of the
world. I prefer the description Inner Ruler of All (Sarva-antaryami) to the
description Inmost Soul of All Beings (Sarva-butha-antharatma). All are in this
Hall, each one has no Hall in him, is it not? In the same way, all are in Him;
which is better than saying, He is in all. It is delusion (maya) that binds and
limits you; all spiritual exercise is to conquer delusion. A bit of iron will sink in
water but if beaten and made hollow, it will float. So beat the mind and make
it hollow. Then it will float on the sea of worldly life. Above all, have
discrimination, and do not be led into taking any false step.
 Grow not only physically but also spiritually
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 91Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 19 - The Moon And The Mind
 You need not waste time in trying to discover Me and My Nature. Understand
what I teach, not "who is the teacher," for I am beyond your intellect and your
power. You will understand Me only through My work. That is why,
sometimes, in order to reveal who I am, I myself show you my "visiting card,"
something that you call a miracle. Know the mystery and carry out the duty I
assign you. In the next fifteen years, a number of young people now growing
up will shine as devoted aspirants in the spiritual field; they know that each of
them is eternal, truth, and pure and that they are children of immortality.
They are growing in discrimination and detachment and are purifying
themselves by repetition of the Name of God. But the elders are laughing at
such boys because they have taken to the godly path. Perhaps they will be
happy if their children loiter in the streets in groups, smoking and swearing
and staring at posters. The elders should be elated that their children are on
the royal road to real joy and contentment and that they will be serving
themselves and the world much better. You do not know how to make an
ornament out of gold, so you give it to a goldsmith. Why worry if he melts it
and beats it and pierces it and pulls it into wire and twists it and cuts it? Let
Him who knows the art shape the child into an ornament of society; do not
worry. You must grow day to day, not only physically but in spiritual life also.
How long are you staying on in the primary school, writing down the letters of
the alphabet? Get up, demand an examination, pass, and move forward to
the higher class!
 The individual soul must master the inner world first
You are now sitting on the floor of the hall; seek the means to see the top
floors too. Progress! Come forward! Then Sivarathri becomes an auspicious
night for you. Otherwise it is just another night (rathri) wasted. Many might
discourage you and say that meditation and worship can be taken up after
you reach a ripe old age, as if they are the prerogatives of or special
punishments for the aged. Enjoy the world while you can and then think of
the next - that seems to be their attitude. The child takes its first few steps in
the comparative safety of the home: it toddles about inside, until its steps
become firm, until its balance is perfected, and until it can run about
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 92Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 19 - The Moon And The Mind
 unaccompanied and without fear. Then only does it venture out into the
streets and the wide world beyond. So too, the living being must master the
inner world first; become impervious to temptations. It should learn not to fall
when the senses trip its steps; it should learn the balance of mind, which will
not make it lean more to one side than to the other. After mastering this
discriminatory wisdom, it can confidently move out into the outer world,
without fear of accidents to its personality. That is why there is this insistence
on "sleeplessness" or vigilance. You cannot claim to be educated or grown up
unless you have mastered the science of self-control and destroyed the root
cause of delusion. It is not this night alone that you should spend in the
thought of Siva; your whole life should be lived in the constant presence of
the Lord.
 Man's basic nature seeks inward contentment
Do not tell me that you do not care for that bliss, that you are satisfied with
the delusion and are not willing to undergo the rigours of sleeplessness. Your
basic nature, believe Me, abhors this dull, dreary routine of eating, drinking,
and sleeping. It seeks something that it knows it has lost: inward contentment
(santhi). It seeks liberation from bondage to the trivial and the temporary.
Everyone craves for it in their heart of hearts. And it is available only in one
shop: contemplation of the Highest Self, the basis of all this appearance.
However high a bird may soar, it has sooner or later to perch on a tree top, to
enjoy quiet. So too, a day will come when even the most haughty, the most
willful, the most unbelieving, and even those who assert that there is no joy
or peace in the contemplation of the Highest Self will have to pray, "God,
grant me peace, grant me consolation, strength, and joy."
 
The ills of the country are due to under-nourishment - not so much under-
nourishment of the body, but under-nourishment of the spirit, want of
spiritual exercise, neglect of spiritual regimen. Allowing the malady the
fullest scope, people are engaged in reciting the names of the drugs in the
pharmacopoeia! They do not make any attempt to take the drug in. The
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 93Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 19 - The Moon And The Mind
 means of conveying into every home and village the life-giving waters of the
spirit have all dried up or got choked up. That is why under-nourishment,
with all its attendant symptoms of debility, nervous disorder, and mania, is
so rampant today. 
- Sri Sathya Sai Baba
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 94Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 20 - Neither Scriptures Nor Logic
 20. Neither Scriptures Nor Logic
Date: 12 April 1959  / Location:  Venkatagiri  / Occasion:  Adyatmic Conference
 
Varanasi Subrahmanya Sastry spoke for long on two types of inquirers at the
present time and the conflict between the two, namely, the expounders of
scriptures and expounders of intellectual reasoning. He said the former
accepted the wisdom of the ancients as recorded in the spiritual texts as
authentic and authoritative, while the latter preferred to follow the path of
reason and take as authoritative only such things as will satisfy their logic. Of
course, he showed the defects of the latter group by taking a number of
examples and exposing the fallacies of the expounders of intellectual
reasoning. He quoted profusely from the scriptural texts and made his
discourse abstruse and scholarly. I feel that most of what he said went above
your heads, so you have missed the crux of what he wanted to communicate.
The intellect (buddhi) revels in discussion and disputation. Once you yield to
the temptation of dialectics, it takes a long time for you to escape from its
shackles and efface it and enjoy the bliss that comes from its nullification. You
must all the while be aware of the limitation of reason. Logic must give way to
logos, and deduction must yield place to devotion. The intellect can help you
only some distance along the Godward path; the rest is illuminated by
intuition. Your feelings and emotions warp even your thought processes, and
reason is made by them into an untamed bull. Very often, egoism tends to
encourage and justify the wildness, for a person is led along the wrong path
by their very reason, if that is the path he likes! You very often come to the
conclusion you want to reach!
 Scriptures are only road maps or guide books
Unless you are extra careful to examine the very process of reasoning, even
while the process is going on, there is the danger that you may be following
only the trail you yourself have laid down. Reason can be tamed only by
discipline, by systematic application of the yoke, the nose-string, the whip,
etc. That is to say, by means of compassion, calmness, forbearance,
endurance, etc. Train it to walk quietly along small stretches of road at first
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 95Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 20 - Neither Scriptures Nor Logic
 and then, after you have become sure of its docility, you can take it along the
tortuous road of the sixfold temptations: the road of lust, anger, greed,
delusion, pride and jealousy. Bhasmasura got vast power through the Grace
of God, even the power to burn into ash anyone on whose head he placed his
hand. But his instincts had not been tamed, his reason had not been purified,
so, in his greed and egoism, he tried to reduce the very Giver of the Gift into
ashes! The scriptures are only road maps. They are guide books at best,
describing the road and giving the directions for the journey. It is the actual
journey that will reveal the hardships, the delays, the landslides, and the pot
holes, as well as the beauty of the scenery encountered and the magnificence
of the final goal. No second-hand account can equal the first-hand
experience. Moreover, the scriptures might speak about a thing in many
different ways, just to elaborate it for better understanding. Even the Vedas
extol a thing in ten different poetic forms, from different angles and
standpoints. But some scholars try to treat each such statement as distinct
and as having a different connotation, so they add to the confusion rather
than reduce it.
 Both have good points as well as limitations
The symbols on the map are interpreted differently by different scholars
according to their preconceived notions, predilections, and pet theories. So
the expounders of scriptures are also not always right. They can be led astray
by the desire to score a point over their adversary. They belong to certain
schools of thought, and this too acts as a brake on their freedom to seek and
know the real meaning of the spiritual texts. I am neither an expounders of
scriptures nor an expounder of intellectual reasoning. I am an expounder of
love. So, I have no conflict with either the scholar who adheres to texts or the
devotee of reason. Both have their good points as well as their limitations. If
you acquire love (prema), then you can dispense with the spiritual texts, for
the purpose of all spiritual texts is just that: to create the feeling of equal love
for all and to negate the egoism that stands in the way. Reason, too, if it
comes in the way of this love, is to be discarded as "perverted". All the time
and energy spent in pursuing the spiritual texts are a sheer waste if study and
reflection do not help you to recognise that the mind is worse than a drunken
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 96Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 20 - Neither Scriptures Nor Logic
 monkey. Pilgrimages too are for elevating the heart, sublimating the
impulses, and leading the lower self to higher levels of thought and action.
Reason serves the same purpose, or at least, it ought to. Reason seeks to
know the unity of the universe, the origin and goal of it all, and the laws that
govern the microcosm and macrocosm. It peeps behind the ever-receding
curtain to get a glimpse of the puppeteer, who pulls the strings.
 Do not run after devious desires
Do not engage yourself in the cultivation of or the promotion of wants and
desires. That is a never-ending process of sowing and reaping, and you will
never reach contentment. One desire when satisfied will fan the thirst for ten
more. This year is named crooked (vikari)! So, be warned! Do not run after
devious desires or crooked satisfactions. All roads leading to the realm of the
senses are tortuous and blind; only the road that leads to God is straight.
Cultivate the path of straightforwardness in everything. That will reveal the
Atma . Straightforwardness will enable you to overcome the three qualities
(gunas). The treatment you have to give these qualities is to grind them to a
paste so that a new taste of bliss (ananda) might emerge, just as you grind
salt, chillies, and tamarind together to get a tasty chutney for your meal. No
single qualities should dominate; all must be tamed and diverted to fill the
lake of ananda . It is the internal ananda that matters, not the external, the
sensory, the objective, the worldly. If the inner poise or inner equilibrium is
undisturbed by external ups and downs, that is real success. Every day is the
same as another, the rising and the setting of the sun, the waxing and waning
of the moon, the seasons, etc. When 365 days are over, we call it a new year
and give it a new number; but the sun and moon are unaffected by it. Be like
the sun and moon. Do not care whether they ring out the old year or ring in
the new.
 Train the mind to disperse the clouds
No one need do anything positive to discover the Atma ; when the "cover" of
illusion is denied and destroyed, it will reveal itself in all its glory. What is
needed is the removal of the fog, the cloud, the miasma, and the casting off
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 97Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 20 - Neither Scriptures Nor Logic
 of all the clinging curtains that limit the self to the body and its adjuncts. How
to remove the fog? How to clean the mirror so that the Atma may be reflected
clearly and without distortion? The mind, which makes you believe in spiritual
texts as the ultimate authority, and the intellect (buddhi), which makes you
believe that reason is the supreme authority - both have to be scrubbed and
polished. They get tarnished pretty quick! They require constant attention.
Like a brass vessel that has to be scrubbed with tamarind and washed and
dried so that it may shine like new, the mind has to be treated ever with
goodness and service, repetition of the Name of the Lord, execution of
beneficial plans, taking up of good deeds, and contemplation of the welfare of
all. The sun is up here in the sky; it is the passing cloud that hides him from
your vision. The sensory world is the cloud that hides the Atma , ever shining
in the firmament of your heart. The same mind that gathers the clouds can
also disperse them in an instant; for it is as the wind, which collects them
from all the quarters and renders the sky dark, and the next moment,
changing direction, sends them in a scurry to wherever they came from! Train
the mind to disperse the clouds, not to gather them. Every aspirant has to do
this by following a systematic discipline. You cannot reach the peak in one
jump; it is a hard job to negate the evidence of the senses; one has to
overcome the tendencies that have grown through hundreds of births. The
world is an illusion and all is Brahman only for one who has reached the
ultimate goal, but until Realisation dawns, one has to wait patiently, hoping
and preparing. The growing baby cannot be fed on adult food; you have to
adjust the food to the needs and capabilities of the child. Do not overdo or
avoid doing anything. Both lead to disease and ruin health.
 Develop bliss through cultivation of love
I do not consider intellectual scholarship as very essential for the spiritual
aspirant. I advise you to develop bliss (ananda), not through these difficult
and even doubtful means but through the cultivation of love (prema), which
begins in the home and family and spreads to all creatures. Put down the
sharp-edged weapon that seeks to analyse and chop the arguments of the
opponent, to cut his point of view to pieces. Take up the sweet pudding of
love, which spreads joy and wins over recalcitrant hearts. That is My path, the
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 98Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 20 - Neither Scriptures Nor Logic
 path of prema , along which I shall take you. That is why I offer My visiting
card to every one of you when you come to Me. I know your name, your
degrees, your profession, your status, and your history. But you do not know
mine. I have no need to know all about you from a perusal of your cards, but I
want you to know something of My Glory. So I give you a glimpse of it, as a
divine miracle. But I also give you enough of My prema so that you can mix a
little of it with whatever you do or feel or think and make it sweet and
palatable.
 
Each has their allotted task, according to the status, taste, tendency, and
earned merit. Do it with the fear of God and of sin, deep in your heart.
Welcome pain and grief so that you take both success and failure as
hammer strokes to shape you into a sturdy spiritual aspirant. Inner content
is more important than outer prosperity. 
- Sri Sathya Sai Baba
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 99Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 21 - The Insentient And The Supreme Consciousness
 21. The Insentient And The Supreme
Consciousness
Date: 10 July 1959  / Location:  Bengaluru  / Occasion:  Akhanda bhajans
 
You have all tasted the sweetness of the Name of the Lord for twenty-four
hours, as continuous devotional singing (akhanda bhajans). Akhanda means
uninterrupted, without any gap. I am glad you sang without any gap and also
that you selected the names of the manifold Forms of God, instead of singing
one particular name throughout, as if God had only one facet of personality.
The same man is father of his children, uncle to his nephews, brother to
some, cousin to many others, and son to his parents. God also has many
aspects, and when you conduct bhajans , try to satisfy all who take part by
reminding them of the manifold manifestations of the Lord, not simply Rama
or Krishna or Sairam. Again, akhanda bhajans means that it should not be just
a twenty-four hour affair or even a seven-day affair; it must go on, from birth
to death, this contemplation of the Source and Goal of things. The procession
to the cremation ground starts immediately on birth, and the beating of the
heart is the drum-beat for the march toward that place. Some take a longer
route, some reach quickly, but all are on the way. Therefore, bhajans has to
start in childhood and has to continue. It must be the constant companion of
a person, their solace and strength. Do not postpone it to old age, for it is the
essential food for the mind.
 There is no consistency in behaviour
You have all been thrilled by these bhajans here, and you are glad that you
got the chance to join. But this is just a temporary feeling. You who shared in
this glorification of the Lord will tomorrow as enthusiastically join in some
other gathering where falsehood and injustice are honoured! There is no
consistency in your behaviour. What you feel as correct and what you do are
poles apart. That is not the mark of a devotee. If there is no faith, how can
you have peace and happiness? People seek frantically for peace and
happiness in a thousand ways along a thousand roads. Dr. Bhagavantam was
telling Me just prior to My coming here, at the Tata Institute of Science, that
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 100Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 21 - The Insentient And The Supreme Consciousness
 there is something beyond all this objective world, some mystery that
becomes deeper and more mysterious with every advance of science. When
one door is opened, ten doors that were closed reveal themselves to the
surprised scientist. So real peace (santhi) is to be got only in the depths of the
spirit, in the discipline of the mind, in faith in the One Base of all this seeming
multiplicity. When that is secured, it is like having gold, you can have any
variety of jewels made from it. It is all a matter of one's own experience. And
the joy of that experience, the profound exhilaration that accompanies it,
cannot be communicated in words. All hearing and singing God's Names is to
take you nearer that experience. Listening is the medicine that you take
internally, and singing is the balm you apply externally. Both are needed. So
also virtue (dharma) as well as sanctified activity (karma) are necessary.
Karma is the very foundation of devotion to God. It is the basement on which
devotion is built. Dharma is the attitude in which action is done, the truth,
love (prema), and equanimity with which the mind is activated when it seeks
to do things.
 Do karma regardless of the fruits thereof
Karma has to be done in and through dharma . Those dominated by
ignorance (thamas) do karma solely for the sake of the fruits thereof, and
they resort to all subterfuges in order to gain from it. For them, the end
justifies the means. Those dominated by passion (rajas) are proud and
pompous and boast that they are the doers, the benefactors, and the
experiencers. Those dominated by the quality of calm serenity (sathwa guna)
will do karma regardless of the fruits thereof, leaving the result to the Lord,
not worrying whether it leads to success or failure, conscious of their duties
and never of their rights. As a matter of fact, there is more joy in the actual
doing than in the result that accrues. This must be your experience. All the
elaborate arrangements that the master of the house makes for a wedding in
the family, the reception, the feeding, the illumination, the music - these are
thrilling while they are being planned and executed, but they do not give so
much pleasure once the thing is done. In the end, when the bills come, they
might even cause disgust and grief! So it must be easy to discard the fruits of
action, provided you spend some thought upon the process of karma and the
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 101Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 21 - The Insentient And The Supreme Consciousness
 worth of the fruit. The individual soul has come to this birth in order to reveal
the splendour of the spark of Godhead, which It is. The body is the wick of the
lamp, yearning for God is the ghee that feeds the flame. But, like the rat that,
attracted by the strong smelling cheap stuff inside the trap, neglects all other
articles of food in the granary and falls a prey to its foolishness, people
neglect their real sustenance and waste their lives in pursuit of mortal riches.
 Various types of devotion
You should see and wonder at the eternal in all this temporariness. This
drama has only two actors: the insentient and Supreme Consciousness, who
play a million roles. Just as violinist Chowdiah here who played ten musical
tunes now and can play 400 tunes on the four strings, the insentient and
Supreme Consciousness together play all these roles. Out of a mere 26 letters
of the alphabet all the words in the dictionary are formed and millions of
books get written, read, and understood. But you should see through this
drama and discover the Director, who is none else than God. This can be done
through devotion based on desireless action. Devotion is of various types,
according to the purificatory acts of the devotee, the state of the mind, and
the stage of development. There is the peaceful devotion of Bhishma, the
parental devotion of Yasoda, the sweet loving devotion of Gouranga and
Meera, and the deep attachment of the cowherd maids (to Krishna). Of these,
the devoted-servant attitude, which grows out of peaceful devotion, is the
easiest and the best for the majority of aspirants at this time. It means total
surrender. Devotion has to be developed by several means or indeed by all
means. The mind and the intellect have to be trained and controlled; that is
the aim. They can take you as far as the qualified dualism. Later, non-
dualistic experience depends upon His Grace, and merging in the Absolute is
in His Hands. The chief means are hearing, singing, remembering Lord's
Name, prostration, salutation, servitude, friendship, and Self-offering.
Friendship is placed just before offering of the Self because between friends,
there is no fear, no doubt or disbelief or hesitation.
 Mission on which the Lord comes on this Earth
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 102Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 21 - The Insentient And The Supreme Consciousness
 It is to clear the path of spiritual progress of humanity that the Avatar (Divine
Incarnation) has come. The restlessness in which man is immersed has to be
curbed. That is what is meant by the saving of all good individual beings from
the tentacles of grief caused by want of knowledge of the relative
unimportance of worldly things. All individual souls must get peace and
happiness; that is the mission on which the Lord comes again and again on
this earth. He selects a place full of holiness and Divinity and takes on the
human form, so that you may meet Him and talk, understand and appreciate,
listen and follow, experience and benefit. The tragedy is that when Godhead
is invisible, formless, you concretise it as you like and pray to it and get
consolation and strength out of it, but when it is before you, concretised in
human form, you doubt and discuss and deny! People fall before the stone
snake and pour milk on it and wash it lovingly with sacred waters, but when it
materialises into an actual cobra, they flee in fear! A true devotee has no fear
or disbelief.
 Feel no shame in walking on the right path
Prahlada was shivering at the Narasimha (Man-Lion) Form when it appeared
from the pillar. When the Lord asked him why, he replied that it was due not
to fear at the form of God, for as he said, all forms of His are lovely as they
are Divine. It was due to fear that the Form might soon disappear and he
might lose the splendid Vision of the Lord. Prahlada's father was so full of
passion that he saw the terrible Narasimha Form, but Prahlada did not see it
so. To Him, the Lord appeared beautiful and full of grace, for he was
saturated with devotion. You must dive deep into the sea to get the pearls.
What good is it to dabble among the waves near the shore and swear that the
sea has no pearls in it and that all tales of its existence are false? So also if
you must realise the full fruit of this Avatar , dive deep and get immersed in
Sai Baba. Halfheartedness, hesitation, doubt, cynicism, listening to tales - all
are of no avail. Concentrated complete faith - that alone can bring victory.
This is true to any worldly activity, is it not? How much more true must it be,
therefore, in the spiritual field? But if you have already attached yourselves to
some one Name and Form, do not change it, do not choose another in place
of the Embodiment of Love. A hundred people might come to your house and
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 103Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 21 - The Insentient And The Supreme Consciousness
 even treat you with affection, but you do not address them as Papa or Daddy.
Have your mind fixed on One; do not now and then allow clouds of doubt, like
"Is He Great?" "Is He God?" to dim your faith. Be bold. Acknowledge the glory
that you have witnessed; proclaim the joy that you have experienced; confess
to the Grace that you have earned. When people ask you whether you too are
going to Puttaparthi, for example, and whether you too are doing bhajans ,
say "Yes," proudly, for there is no shame in walking on the right path!
 Peace cannot be won by study of books
Some gurus insist on implicit obedience. They even advise their disciples to
beat anyone who cavil at their master! I have contempt for all such, and I
have come to give them proper advice. The guru can never usurp the position
of Siva; it is better that you have Siva Himself as your guru rather than have
these power-mad and egoistic teachers, who revel in hatred and
aggrandizement. Leave all those who cavil severely alone, with their karma
and their ignorant bliss - not merely those who are ignorant of Me but even
those who deride all forms of God and the very idea of God. Develop faith in
yourselves, so that you can stand like a rock braving the rushing waters of
the flood of negation. That faith will make you forget the changing
circumstances of the outer world. Ramadas, when he was put in jail, thanked
Rama for the great blessing, for he felt that he could now carry on his
repetition of God's Name undisturbed by the world, which was mercifully shut
off by the high prison walls!
 The first steps are the most hard in the pilgrimage
It all depends on the point of view whether you are happy or unhappy. The
point of view colours all attitudes and options. Ramadas sang the exploits of
Anjaneya (Hanuman) in Lanka and, while doing so, he mentioned the white
lilies of the island. Anjaneya heard him sing it and immediately took exception
to the description. He said that he had never seen a single white flower there;
the lilies of Lanka were red, he declared. Ramadas, however, insisted that
they were white. Anjaneya got annoyed at the impudence of poets who tried
to pit their imagination against a first-hand expert witness and appealed to
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 104Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 21 - The Insentient And The Supreme Consciousness
 Rama for intercession. Rama agreed with Ramadas! He said that Anjaneya
saw them red because his eyes were affected by passionate anger at the
entire demonic brood! So, if you have peace (santhi), the world will appear a
quite peaceful place; if you have restlessness, the world will be full of
restlessness. Santhi is to be won by spiritual disciplines, not by study of
books. One judge reads huge big volumes and writes one judgement for a
suit; another judge reads the same huge big books and writes quite an
opposite judgement for the same suit! Books are just guides for some bit of
the road. Afterward, you have to find the way yourselves, and it gets easier as
you go. One naya paisa and another make two, four more make an anna, and
a hundred make a rupee. The first steps are the most hard; the pilgrimage to
Kasi (Benaras) is to begin with the first step. Keep the flame of detachment
with tiny sticks until it grows into a big bonfire; welcome all chances to
develop discrimination. If you are good for the world, then the Lord of worlds
will shower Love on you. Become a blossom, exude the fragrance of selfless
service and love (prema); then I shall gladly wear the garland composed of all
of you. Take the name of the Lord and repeat it always. I was listening to the
bhajans you did here yesterday and today. Your voices were low; they could
scarce be heard outside this hall. I know that in a certain institution where
they decided to do continuous bhajans (akhanda bhajans), they had to hire a
few people at so much per hour so that their plan could succeed. Do bhajans
with faith and enthusiasm. Let the whole city shake with devotion you put into
every Name that you sing. The Name promotes comradeship and establishes
concord; it stills all storms and grants peace.
 
All the joy you crave for is in you, but, like one who has vast riches in the
iron chest but who has no idea where the key is, you suffer. With proper
directions, dwelling upon them in the silence of meditation, it is possible to
secure the key, open the chest, and be rich in joy. 
- Sri Sathya Sai Baba
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 105Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 21 - The Insentient And The Supreme Consciousness
  
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 106Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 22 - The Screen Within
 22. The Screen Within
Date: 11 July 1959  / Location:  Tirupati  / Occasion:  Thyagabrahma Festival
 
It has become a convention to address such a gathering as "Brothers and
Sisters", though no speaker is prepared to live up to the ideal that such a
form of address implies. Many such empty formalities have entered into daily
conduct. For example, it was mentioned now, that today is a 'red letter day' in
the history of Tirupati. Red-letter days or days that have to be recorded in
letters of gold are becoming quite cheap nowadays.
 
Only four days, remember, deserve that honour:
the day on which devotees gather to sing the glory of God;
the day the hungry are fed;
the day one meets a great sage; and,
the day on which discrimination dawns on the individual.
This day certainly falls in the category, so the secretary's description is, for
once, right. I like the work in which this committee is engaged, so I hurried to
this place from Bangalore, where yesterday there was continuous singing
(akhanda bhajans) by many devotees. I like Saint Thyagaraja. My affection for
him is not a matter of today. It is centuries old. And Thyagaraja and Tirupati
are also attached to each other. He prayed here that the screen hiding the
Light that was inside him might be moved aside by the Lord's Grace. This
committee has been trying heroically to erect a place of worship for the saint
and a hall to celebrate the Thyagaraja Festival and to encourage the study
and practice of his songs. I was sorry when I heard their report and listened to
the journeys these people have made to distant places and the driblets of
donations they have received so far.
 The means for collecting donations must be pure
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 107Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 22 - The Screen Within
 Though the report is evidence of their devotion and sacrifice, it reveals the
false sense of values that people are developing nowadays. Money (dabbu)
must also circulate like blood (blooddu)! Otherwise, that too will cause ill
health. There is no better method of using money than for promoting
devotion, for then the entire system, individual and social, will benefit. If
money is stored and not circulated, it will cause social swellings, and the
swellings may become boils and burst. I learn that the secretaries in their
despair have thought of running a lottery for completing this structure. I am
very much against this plan. A lottery attracts money from persons who are
moved by greed; it holds out the attraction of quick riches and tempts men
from a wrong angle. It will be tainted money to sell lottery tickets and
distribute prizes and use the balance. Though it is for a good purpose, the
means must be pure. Everyone who gives even a paisa must give it out of
real devotion, knowing that the paisa will be used for the building that one
wants to get built. Do not receive money given halfheartedly or with some
motive other than devotion. Then only will the building be worthy of
Thyagaraja, who spurned the wealth (nidhi) offered by the Rajas of Tanjore
and preferred the proximity (sanidhi) of the Lord to the favours bestowed by
human donors. It is when diseases are rampant that doctors are needed
more; and now, when the standard of moral conduct has fallen very much,
people must turn to doctors like Thyagaraja, who dispense the drug of
repeating the Name Rama in their own sweet palatable versions. All have
equal right to share in the health-giving properties of that drug. In every
linguistic group we have great doctors who treat this disease of worldly
existence successfully - Surdas in Hindi, Ramalingaswami in Tamil, and
Purandharadasa in Kanada, to give just one example in each language.
 Thyagaraja's songs impart bliss
Thyagaraja is in a class by himself, not because he sang in Telugu but
because his songs are marked by the rare excellences of sincerity of
devotion, poetical beauty, and musical melody. The tune suited to the
emotional tempo of the idea elucidated in the song; the marking of time quite
appropriate to the movement of the meaning; the words, which automatically
dictate the marking of time and guide the musician along the notes and the
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 108Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 22 - The Screen Within
 entire structure of the song, helping the arousal of the yogic urge in the
singer - such spontaneous mastery of the science and art of both music and
spiritual exercise is seldom found in the history of any language or country.
He sang unaware, out of the fullness of his realisation, so the songs have that
strange communicative force imparting bliss (ananda) to the singer as well as
the listener. Devaki gave birth to Krishna, but the child was brought up by
Yasoda in Brindavana. Yasoda had all the delight that the child could give. So
too, the Tamil devotees of music have adopted Thyagaraja and have
practised his songs more than the Telugu speaking people. They are the
Yasoda of Thyagaraja. The Tamils specialise in tune and beat, and they sing
with scrupulous adherence to these. However, since they do not grasp the full
meaning of the text, distortions painful to the Telugu ear often occur. More
and more Telugu devotees have to learn to sing Thyagaraja musical
compositions so that the nuances of the Telugu language in the songs may
not be missed. After all, the tune, beat, and notations are to help in the more
easy assimilation of the message contained in the song and in the
transmission to the singer and the listener of the live emotion out of which
the song arose in the first instance. This can happen only if the meaning is
clear.
 Devotion is the reservoir for all the temples
Music as a vehicle of peace is universally popular; men, women, and children
of all lands are amenable to its subtle influence. Even animals and plants are
susceptible to music. The Lord has said: "Where My devotees sing, there I
seat Myself (madbhaktha yathra gaayanthe, thathra thishthaami, Narada)" So
the songs of Thyagaraja sung well and with full realisation of the context and
meaning are excellent media for the spread of devotion. That is why I came
today, to encourage and bless this committee, which is celebrating
Thyagaraja Festival. Three things combined to bring Me here: their yearning,
faith, and conjunction of convenience! The Thirumalai Tirupati Devasthanam
must foster the nurseries of devotion wherever they are found. For it is
through devotion that pilgrims flock to the Hill and pray before Venkateswara.
If the springs of devotion dry up, with what are the minds of men to be
watered? That is the reservoir for all the temples of this land. So, the
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 109Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 22 - The Screen Within
 Devasthanam can well come to the rescue of this committee. It is doing the
work of the Devasthanam, by promoting the musical compositions of
Thyagaraja, that develops the spirit of devotion. Thyagaraja was Valmiki
himself come to the south of India to sing the glory of Rama and spread the
Rama tharaka mantra. He had always the welfare of the individual as well as
the world in view. He had the experience of the constant presence of the
Lord, so that Rama had to give him audience and come to his help a number
of times. His devotion made him ever at peace and joyful.
 India is on the threshold of a new era
Prayer and contrition are the two disciplines by which the mind can be
cleansed of egoism and hatred; Thyagaraja is a fine example of how this can
be done. He was ever engaged in the process of examining his words and
deeds and evaluating them on the touchstone of devotion. As the bee in
search of honey wanders in search of the flowers, as the creeper clings fast
and fondly to the tree lest it fall, as the rill runs to the river and the river
rushes to the sea, so Thyagaraja pined for Rama. His songs are pure fragrant
blossoms of devotion and, therefore, are immortal. Everyone seeks rest, but
the dust of sense craving accumulates on the mind, producing rust and
threatening to "burst" it; so one has to test it, off and on, keep it in perfect
trim. To remove that rust, the music of Thyagaraja's musical compositions will
be useful. Lay aside your cynicism for a while and listen to the captivating
tunes and imbibe the sense. The science of spiritual culture and of the control
of the mind has been developed and practised in this country for thousands of
years, and that is why Indian civilisation has stood the shock of ages and the
fury of typhoons that swept whole peoples off their feet. India is still green
and fresh, on the threshold of a new era, under the leadership of her own
ancient ideals. The taste for good music has also gone nowadays, with the
coming of catchy lilts and croonings from the cinemas, and the craze has
spread for imitating them even in bhajans! Sing the compositions of
Thyagaraja in the classical tunes, and I am sure they will have great appeal.
They are not mere songs (paatalu), they are bundles (mutalu) of precious
stones; they take you along the road (batalu) to God. If Thyagaraja gets
neglected, this Holy Hill will lose height, for the Hill stands so high because it
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 110Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 22 - The Screen Within
 rests on the pedestal of devotion. Neglect of Thyagaraja can happen only
when the people of this land become desperately worldly, deaf to the whisper
of the God within.
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 111Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 23 - The Temple
 23. The Temple
Date: 09 September 1959  / Location:  Budili Village
 
I ALWAYS take delight in going to villages and meeting villagers. The villager
has a pure unsullied mind, and the atmosphere of the village is sincere and
untouched by artificiality. Today is a great day in the history of your village,
because you are getting a hospital and a health centre under the Community
Development Scheme. I am glad you are aware of its importance. You have
made arrangements to celebrate the event in a grand manner, all of you
joining together joyfully to carry out the various tasks allotted by the
organisers. It is this spirit of cooperation and this joyful comradeship that your
village has shown that has brought Me here today. I am Love (Prema), and I
want to see prema progress in all places and affairs. Man suffers from two
types of ills, physical and mental, the one caused by the dis-equilibrium of the
three tempers of wind, bile, and phlegm and the other caused by the dis-
equilibrium of the three qualities (gunas): serenity, passion, and inertia
(sathwa , rajas , and thamas). One peculiar fact about these two types of
illnesses is that the cultivation of virtue cures both. Physical health is a
prerequisite for mental health, and mental health ensures physical health! An
attitude of generosity, of fortitude in the presence of sorrow and loss, a spirit
of enthusiasm to do good, to be of service to the best of one's capacity -
these build up the mind as well as the body. The very joy derived from service
reacts on the body and makes you free from disease. The body and the mind
are closely interrelated.
 Despair is a sin against God
You are mostly agriculturists, so I need not tell you that hope is what you feed
on most months of the year. Hope sustains you while you plough, sow, plant,
and manure the crops that you raise. That hope must be a mental habit even
in things distinct from agriculture. Hope will sustain you in all walks of life. Do
not give any chance for that vile thing, despair, to eat into the vitals of
activity and effort. Despair is a sin against God. When He is in you, why do
you lose hope? That is why the Lord says: why fear when I am here? Be
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 112Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 23 - The Temple
 always joyful, optimistic, and courageous. You said that the river Chithravathi
that flows near Puttaparthi flows by the side of your village too, and that it is
a link between us both. But it is a very feeble link, if at all, for it is full only a
few days in the year. The rest of the year it is a sandy waste! If the life-giving
waters of courage flow in your heart of hearts, then that Chithravathi is more
precious than this dry stream; it is a truer link between you and Me. The
village is the backbone of the whole country. The child becomes an adult, the
village grows into a town; but we should see that the innocent, simple,
sincere child does not grow into a cruel, hard-hearted man. Similarly, we have
to see that the quiet, God-fearing simple village does not grow into a noisy
negative town. Tomorrow's leaders are being bred in this and other villages
all over the land. If you have virtue, towns will have virtue tomorrow. If you
have strength, towns will be strong. If you are quarrelsome, towns will be
affected by it. Learn to live and work in amity. Make the joyful experience of
today a permanent feature of your life.
 Do not depend on government for all your wants
Factions and parties in villages are the bane of our community life. All the
profit of hard toil is wasted in litigation engendered by hatred arising from
them. You grow the food and the material for clothing for the people. You set
the example of industry to the indolent. You rise with the cock-crow and you
go to bed when the fowls go to sleep. You sweat and toil and watch the sky
prayerfully with hands folded in devotion, and you live humbly and thankfully.
There is an intimate relationship between the season and farmer (rithu and
rythu). Your life runs on an even keel, following the regularity of the seasons.
You do not hurry ahead of nature, as townsmen do. I want you to be grateful
to the persons who made this hospital possible and to the government who
are running it for you. The government collects money from you and arranges
these amenities. But you should not depend on the government to satisfy all
your wants. Even the officers are not all powerful. They are only servants,
who have to obey others. The government is the chauffeur of the car, which is
the State. You own the car, and you are the passengers too. Select proper
chauffeurs and be vigilant to see that the driver at the wheel does not harm
the passengers or the car. That is the duty of the owner, is it not? The
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 113Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 23 - The Temple
 greatest instrument by which success can be ensured for all your efforts is
devotion. That will give health, wealth, and prosperity too, for it will eliminate
hatred and faction and give more power to your elbow when you plough the
land. A man with devotion will do every act as worship of the Lord, so the act
will be done better and more efficiently, without any malingering or
insincerity. It will also win the Grace of the Lord, so a devotee will be able to
raise more crops and enjoy greater health and mental happiness.
 Do some inner cultivation
If all the thousand persons in a village sing the glory of the Lord together, that
will produce greater harmony and social cohesion than the thousand
clamouring and shouting one against the other. Love (prema) will flood the
village and fertilise all your efforts if you take the Lord's name and sing
together. Do it for some time, and you will yourself bear witness to the
changed atmosphere. Sometimes, the cloud of envy and hatred comes to
darken relationship. This is due primarily to fear, fear that causes anger. All
that will disappear with the emergence of devotion and the humility and
wisdom that come in its wake. Anger wastes time, health, and character. Do
not allow it free play. Do some inner "cultivation" too, as you are now doing
external cultivation in these fields. That has to be done in the field of feelings,
motives, desires, and promptings.' I saw your temple while coming in
procession on that bullock cart. I found it dilapidated and not in a good clean
condition. The heart of the village is the temple; the lamp burning there is the
life of the entire village. Keep it burning bright and clear. Someone has placed
a broken bandy cart on the narrow verandah of the temple; that is as bad as
dishonouring the abode of the Lord. It will not inspire devotion in the people.
Keep the temple, however simple and small it may be, clean and free from
encumbrances. Do not treat it as some villagers do - as a refuge for idlers,
who loiter around and play cards or gamble. Get together a bhajan group in
this village. I know you have one; but it must be more active; it must attend
the daily worship in this temple and make it a fountain of devotion. That will
demonstrate that you have gratitude to the Lord for all the blessings He has
showered on you.
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 114Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 23 - The Temple
  Develop the spirit of mutual help
The doctor in charge of the hospital now appealed to you for cooperation. He
meant that you should not neglect the bodily ills and damage the tabernacle
of God. It is an instrument that has to be well cared for. The doctor is an
expert in that subject, having studied medicine for long and being moved by
a spirit of service. Honour him for his skill, have faith in him and his
medicines, and do not, by neglect or resorting to quacks, worsen the diseases
you may have. I say this specially to you, people of Budili! Develop the spirit
of mutual help. Villagers have been ruined because one person cannot
tolerate the prosperity of another. This is the bane of the Indian character.
Everyone is bent on pulling down his neighbour, whereas in the West, they
encourage the slightest sign of superior intelligence and industry and show no
rivalry. Jealousy is the cause of ruin. It is born of the undue importance
attached to the body, the senses, and the accumulation of objects that cater
to the senses. See things in their proper perspective, and give them their
worth but no more. There are greater things that grant joy and peace. Try to
get hold of them; every one of you has a right to possess them. None can
keep them away from your grasp.
 Fix your attention on the eternal values
You spoke of the Brahmeswara Temple that was once here but that has since
gone under the sands of the river. Let not the temple of the Lord that is in
your innermost heart be similarly overwhelmed by the sands of lust and
anger. You talked of many sages and yogis who have done penance here,
according to tradition. Well, those sages and yogis knew which is real and
which is unreal. They controlled the vagaries of the mind and dwelt in peace
(santhi). Fix your attention on these eternal values; then you will not be swept
off your feet by gusts of passion or fits of fury. Then this village, filled with
love and mutual helpfulness, will become the ideal for miles around.
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 115Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 24 - Many-pointedness And One-pointedness
 24. Many-pointedness And One-pointedness
Date: 25 November 1959  / Location:  Madakasira
 
THOUGH this area and this town are not new to Me, this is the first time that
most of you are seeing Me. When a few more dishes are prepared, it become
a festival day. So, when the district athletic competitions are held here, it is a
festival for the boys and students as well as for parents and others interested
in the welfare of the country. You have all put on a glad face forgetting the
daily drudgery. You have witnessed the competitions and the games and
enjoyed the keenness and enthusiasm of the participants. The students
sitting before us are the instruments with which the India of tomorrow is to be
shaped. Their teachers, who are also here, are indeed lucky, for destiny has
allotted them the noble task, the golden chance, to serve the interests of the
people in a pleasant manner, spending their time in the company of innocent
fresh children. The father, mother, and teacher are the three primarily
responsible for moulding the future of the country. Of these, teachers play the
most important role, for they are specially trained and selected for the job;
they voluntarily take it up and therefore must carry it out to the best of his
ability without demur; they are implicitly trusted by the child, the parents,
and the public alike and the trust must be repaid by honest service. The
teacher is honoured and respected by the children and the public as the guru,
with all the hallowed associations of that word. The teacher may be poor,
uncared for by the people at the top, but the satisfaction gotten by the quiet
creative work is enough compensation.
 Teacher should himself follow the advice he gives
The teacher should never curse his pupils whatever the provocation; he must
always bless them. If he swears like a boor, he reduces himself to the level of
a boor. He should watch his behaviour rigorously and find out whether there
is some habit or trait that if imitated by the pupil will be harmful. He should
himself follow the advice that he gives. Otherwise, he will be teaching
hypocrisy to the little children and encouraging them to acquire the
cleverness not to be found out. It is sheer mental weakness and cowardice
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 116Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 24 - Many-pointedness And One-pointedness
 that allows hypocrisy to develop. If you have the courage to face the
consequences, you will never utter falsehood. Do not try to rule through the
easier means of fear, for that is full of dangerous consequences to the pupils.
Try rather the path of Love. Teachers should themselves take to the discipline
of repetition of the Lord's Name and meditation; this will give them the inner
quiet they sorely need. They should create an atmosphere of plain living and
high thinking, for pupils unconsciously accept them as heros and begin
imitating them. They should hand over to the rising generation the riches that
past generations have amassed, viz., the spiritual disciplines and discoveries.
Learn them yourselves, and teach them to the pupils under your care. This
will enable you to discharge the debt due from you to the sages of old. I know
that when you sow bitter seeds you cannot grow sweet grain. Yet, certain
things are possible even under the limitations of the present curricula and
courses of study.
 Be grateful to the village where you were born
The unmistakable sign of rain is the wetness of the ground; so too, the sign of
a person who has had some years of schooling is good manners. One must
have humility and know that the field of knowledge is so vast that one has
been unable even to touch its fringe; one must be aware of one's kinship with
all mankind and must show a keenness to do service to others, at all times,
gladly, and without desire for publicity. The educated boy must move with
others in a free and friendly way. God is the moving force in everyone. God is
behind all good impulses and useful attitudes, you are all separate beads
strung together on that one thread, God. Hatred is ugly, unnatural, and
inhuman; it is against the very core of love that is in every one. Always
respect another's opinion and another's point of view. Do not start a quarrel
at the slightest difference of opinion. The other person may be right and you
may be wrong. Ponder over their argument; they might have had the
advantage of knowing more about the subject, or you may be prejudiced
either for or against, or they may not know as much as you. All differences of
opinion are not due to personal hatred, remember. Above all, I must tell you
one thing. Honour your parents and the villagers among whom you grow up.
Be grateful to the parents for all the care and sacrifice they undergo for your
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 117Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 24 - Many-pointedness And One-pointedness
 sake. Be grateful also to the village where you first saw the light. What good
is it if after being born in one place and bred in the cradle of its love if you run
away somewhere and make that new place better? Always turn your attention
to your village and think of ways and means of bettering its lot. That is the
gratitude you must show.
 Start the spiritual pilgrimage early in life
By all means, master the subjects prescribed in your curriculum of studies,
but along with them, study also the principles of the Eternal Universal
Religion (Sanathana Dharma). Do not give it up as old (sanathana), coming
down from very ancient times. It has stood the test of centuries and is
capable of giving you joy and peace even today. It is like a very loving
grandmother, anxious and capable of feeding you with nice good dishes. You
would not allow such a grandmother to die of neglect, would you? A miser
lived in a leaky house. The rainwater poured into the house through the roof,
but he sat through it all. Neighbours laughed at him and warned him to get
the roof repaired. But in the rainy season he replied, "Let the rains subside,
how can I repair it now?" And when the rains stopped, he replied, "Why
should I worry about leaks now the rains have stopped?" Do not suffer the
leaks when the rains come, as they are sure to do; repair the roof now. That is
to say, acquaint yourselves with the spiritual primers and textbooks now;
begin the first lessons of silence, prayer ,and chanting the Name of the Lord.
It is never too soon in the spiritual pilgrimage. Now when you wear bush-coats
and strut about in pants, causing envy among the little children who cannot
afford these, you feel elated. But you can be legitimately proud only when
you are able to control the vagaries of the mind and direct your emotions and
desires along honourable healthy channels, braving even the ridicule of your
so-called friends. That is real freedom, real success. If you reach that stage,
then you become a seasoned driver and can be trusted with the wheel on any
road and with any cargo, however precious. Then you will not cause harm
either to yourself or to others. Then you deserve to become a leader.
 Only men with ideals are remembered by posterity
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 118Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 24 - Many-pointedness And One-pointedness
 Be eager and earnest to know more and more about the art of joyful living,
happy unperturbed living. One can advance only step by step, and there is
the danger of slipping down two steps when you climb one. What matters is
the determination to climb, the resistance with which the sliding tendency is
met, the yearning to rise to progress, to conquer the lower impulses and
instincts. If you have that, the hidden spring of power will surge up within
you; the Grace of the Lord will smooth your path. Keep the ideal before you;
march on. The student of today becomes the teacher of tomorrow and
headmaster later. How? By study, by the development of a reliable character.
Only those with ideals are respected and remembered in gratitude by
posterity. Rama is honoured and worshipped, while Ravana is execrated.
Why? Because of the character they evinced. Have the progress of your
country, your Sanathana Dharma , and your own Self always before your
mind's eye. Let the hunger for serving these three grow more and more. Then
your studies will serve a purpose and give you a sense of mission. Then you
will acquire fear of sin, fear of the God within, fear of the mean, respect for
elders, and faith in your own self. One thing more: Do not do anything that
brings tears into the eyes of your parents. Honour them and obey them. Do
not condemn them as old-fashioned. "Old is Gold." They speak out of a longer
experience of the world and its tricks.
 Winners must be thankful to the losers
Well, I am asked to distribute prizes (bahumathis) to you by Anjanappa and
others. They meant that I should distribute the prizes, but "bahumathi "
means "multi-mindedness". Now, I never give that type of mind! I always
insist on single-mindedness (ekagratha). Anjanappa wished that I give you
prasad (propitiatory offering); My prasad is always the Gift of Bliss! It can be
got only through single-mindedness. I do not like this competition and strife,
this cultivation of egoism through prizes and ranking. I am sure none of you
here will be spoilt either by pride or by dejection. Take failure coolly and take
victory also coolly. The second is a very difficult mental exercise. The winners
must be thankful to the losers for their victory, for if the losers had put in a
little more effort, they would have carried away the prizes instead. The losers,
by running neck to neck with you, prompted you to run faster and thus
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 119Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 24 - Many-pointedness And One-pointedness
 encouraged you to win. They gave you the grit to put in that extra pace,
which brought the prize into your hands. And the losers! I ask you not to lose
self-confidence. Do not attach too much value to victory or too much
importance to defeat. Even in examinations, when you fail, do not be
overcome by despair and do silly things like attempting to take your own life.
Life is much more precious than that. You are born for much greater things
than the passing of examinations. Be brave and patient. All is not lost if you
do not pass an examination, which tests just one aspect of your intelligence!
Your destiny does not depend upon examination marks; it depends more on
character, will-power, and the Grace of God. The Headmaster hoped that this
school would become a Higher Secondary School. I bless that it may be raised
to that status soon and become a source of light and culture for this part of
the country.
 
Love is God, God is Love. Where there is Love, there God is certainly
evident. Love more and more people, love them more and more intensely.
Transform the love into service, transform the service into worship; that is
the highest spiritual discipline. 
- Sri Sathya Sai Baba
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 120Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 25 - Man And Mind
 25. Man And Mind
Date: 22 January 1960  / Location:  Aukiripalli  / Occasion:  Markandeya Sanskrit College
 
Dr. Bhagavantam asked Me now to "speak" to you, but I do not make
speeches. I only "converse" with you. I do not make public speeches or
address meetings, as so many of the persons who spoke now do. They made
"speeches", which were regular feasts to the ear. My conversation will be, on
the other hand, "medicine for the mind". Theirs were lectures; Mine are
mixtures. So you must take my talk into your mind very attentively and
without wasting or spilling even a word. Usually, when you are asked where
God is, you point to the sky or some such distant place and say He is there, as
if He is just a Person and has a definite place of Residence. But man (nara)
himself is God (Narayana), each one of them; God (Madhava) is man
(manava), each one of the species. So the number of Gods is thirty-three
crores, as given in the spiritual texts or, as can be calculated today, much
more. It is delusion that has induced the embodiment of God to imagine and
behave as if he is just a man (nara). To remove that delusion, there are
various means suited to the needs of each sufferer. But all the treatment and
all the struggle is to achieve the experience of being Narayana and discard
the limited, bound, relative entity, nara . That is the one harvest yielded by all
the various processes. Until one understands oneself, the delusion and the
resultant grief cannot be ended.
 India is the birth place of spiritual science
Let me tell you that you cannot understand Me and My Secret without first
understanding yourselves. For if you are too weak to grasp your own Reality,
how can you hope to fathom the much grander Reality of My advent? To
grasp My meaning, you have to tear into tatters the doubts and theories you
now have and cultivate love (prema), for the embodiment of prema can be
understood only through prema . The "miracles and wonders" that cannot be
explained by the categories of science are so natural to Me that I am amused
when you label them as miracles. The Lord had announced that He would
come down for the restoration of righteousness (dharma) and that He would
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 121Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 25 - Man And Mind
 assume human Form so that all might gather round Him and feel the thrill of
His companionship and conversation. And the Lord has come, as announced.
For those who are drawn by the pulls of the mind, the intellect, and the ego,
things beyond the ken of these three are inscrutable. There is a limit beyond
which the mind and the intellect cannot traverse. That is why the Supreme
Power has to envelop Itself with delusion (maya) and come down to the level
of human comprehension. This Bharathavarsha (India) is the birth place of
spiritual science. Here, every man, woman, and child is a student of that
science. Each one here is entitled to the study of that supreme subject. The
ancient heritage must be handed down to each boy and girl in the land, not
merely to the students of institutions like this. In this spiritual science, some
one method or other has been emphasised during the various periods of
history. It was mystic formula (mantra) once, ceremonial sacrifice (yaga)
another time, divine communion (yoga), a little later, and after the rise of
Buddhism and its spread to all parts of India and even her neighbours, it has
been magical and mystical formularies (tantra). Sankara gave great
encouragement to tantra , and Poet Kalidasa also considered it important. It
flourished due to the encouragement that Sivaji gave to the tantric scholars,
and it dominated the spiritual life of the country for many centuries.
 Tantra, a spiritual science based on energy
Tantra means only "that which saves well," so there is no reason to feel
apologetic about it. It is just a means to achieve the aim of the merging of the
individual soul with Brahman (the Supreme Soul). Sir John Woodroffe has
shown in his books that tantra is a systematic discipline, which employs
symbolism and sublimation to purify the instincts and control the mind. He
removed to a great extent the prejudice that had kept people away from
tantra . It is spiritual science based on the feminine aspect of energy (sakthi),
which plays a central part in the spiritual progress of humanity. Examine,
each of you, your own mental make-up and see whether you have used your
discrimination and worldly knowledge to clothe yourself in detachment, so
that you do not suffer from attachment to things that will fade away. There is
no dearth of books telling you how to be free from grief. The Gita is available
in all languages and at a very low cost, say, four annas a copy. The
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 122Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 25 - Man And Mind
 Bhagavatha and the Ramayana and all other books are sold at the rate of
thousands of copies per day, but there is nothing to indicate that they have
been read and assimilated. The breath of the mouth must give an inkling of
the food partaken, is it not? But the habits, the conduct, the character of the
readers of these books have not undergone any change for the better.
Egoism and greed are still rampant, hatred has not abated, and envy eats
into the vitals of society.
 Spiritual study must not develop egoism
Similarly, do not treat My words too lightly. Do not say, "We saw Sai Baba and
heard his talk and it was all very fine." Decide at least to carry out some one
piece of advice for your spiritual advance. It is very wrong to tarnish the body
making it perform a single bad deed or making it move in bad company.
Sanctify the body, sanctify each activity by devoting it to a high purpose. I am
not commanding you today on the basis of my authority, I am telling you out
of the fullness of Love (Prema), on the basis of the right I have to chastise you
and direct you along the path. I know that the elders, while themselves
neglecting the cultivation of higher virtues and themselves discarding the
discipline of repetition of the name and meditation, commit the additional
crime of laughing at their children who feel the sweetness of the Name of the
Lord and who frequent the places where they can get good company, noble
thoughts, and spiritual teaching. They call such young persons demented and
try to cure them by their own special course of punishment. Their children's
insanity is certainly preferable to the madness for luxury, for gambling, for
drink, and for loose morals that have become the only property the elders
leave behind for their children. Your study here must develop your powers of
discrimination, not your egoism. Do not argue for argument's sake, for it will
lead only to dry scholarship and intellectual pride. Such craving for criticism is
a disease of the intellect, and it has to be nipped in the bud. Examine the
thing that you do not like very closely and with great care. Do not jump to
conclusions, favourable or unfavourable. That would be abdicating your
precious status of "thinker" and your responsibility to yourself. Even the sun,
which is millions of miles away, can set fire to some object if by means of a
magnifying glass its rays are focused at one point. So also, focus all your
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 123Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 25 - Man And Mind
 powers of observation and judgement on one topic and it will surely stand
revealed.
 Man can and should be the master of his mind
The world itself is subject to constant agitation; how can your plan to lead a
quiet contented peaceful life upon it succeed? It is like trying to float without
any heaving or falling while being tossed about on the waves of the sea.
Under such conditions, the best thing is to recognise the fact and not to worry
about the unavoidable. Manushya , the word meaning "man", implies that
man is the master of his mind (manas). When people come to Me and
complain that they cannot concentrate, I laugh at their weakness, for even
the driver of a car is a master of the art of concentration. He does not pay
heed to the chatter from the back seat or to the chatter of the person on his
left. He is watching the road in front of him with single-pointed attention.
 Learn to listen with one-pointed attention
If you have faith, more than half the battle is won. That is why, in the Gita,
Krishna asks Arjuna, "Have you listened to what I have said with one-pointed
attention?" Arjuna, good student that he is, replies that even in the midst of
the opposing armies ranged on the battlefield, he has listened to the words of
the Lord with keen concentration. Learn that concentration and your learning
will stand you in good stead. I have been asked to inaugurate the Library of
this College by the token act of giving over these books to the Principal to be
placed on the shelves along with the books already there. Come and read the
books in the library and enjoy the teachings that are given by great spiritual
aspirants and divine seers. Let children also come and handle the books and
turn over the pages; the library must be useful for all persons of this town
from the age of 2 to 60 or 70. It is not like a hospital, which is unnecessary for
some. It benefits all, so all must make the best use of it. The wisdom that
these books contain should percolate to every home in Aukiripaili. Sanskrit
learning has to advance by your efforts and your enthusiasm. The whole
world will benefit if you keep it burning bright. Fulfill that responsibility of
yours to the best of your ability, and the Lord will shower His Grace on you.
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 124Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 25 - Man And Mind
 Do not mistake the technique for the goal; do not lose your way in the tangle
of scholarship. Scholarship and learning are only means for the mastery of the
mind. Turn from the Creation to the Creator.
 
If only men knew the path to permanent joy and peace, they would not
wander distracted among the bye-lanes of sensual pleasure. Just as the joy
felt in dreams disappears when you wake, the joy felt in the waking stage
disappears when you wake into the higher awareness, called jnana . Use the
moment while it is available, for the best of uses: awareness of the Divine in
all. When you die, you must die not like a tree or a beast or a worm but like
a man who has realised that he is God. That is the consummation of all the
years you spend in the human frame. 
- Sri Sathya Sai Baba
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 125Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 26 - The World, My Mansion
 26. The World, My Mansion
Date: 26 June 1960  / Location:  Chennai
 
This gathering reminds Me of the sea, for here we have in this hall streams of
people coming from various directions toward God; people who follow various
paths to attain peace and happiness. My Mission is to give you Bliss (Ananda),
and I am ever ready to do so. My language may give some of you a little
trouble, for you may not follow Telugu, but in this gathering there will be
some who will not be able to follow whatever language I speak in; so I shall
speak in Telugu itself. There are four things in which every man must interest
himself: "Who am I? Where did I come? Whither am I going? How long shall I
be here?" All spiritual inquiry begins with these questions and attempts to
find out the answers. The four Vedas give the answers to these four
questions. Suppose a letter is put into the post box without the address to
which it should go or the address from which it has come. It will not reach
anywhere. It is a waste to have written it. So too, it is a waste to have come
into this world if it is not known where you came from and where you go. The
letter will go to the dead letter office! The individual soul will be caught in the
cycle of birth and death and can never find itself. For this, enquiry about the
Self and for the successful arrival at the correct answers, spiritual discipline is
essential. The answers must become part of your experience.
 Have tolerance and patience in every act
Spiritual exercises must be done in a disciplined, systematic manner, in an
atmosphere of virtue. Just as we have fans here in this hall to cool the
atmosphere and make it possible for such a large gathering to sit packed in
this hall, so too the fans of truth, righteousness, peace, and love (sathya ,
dharma , santhi , and prema) are necessary to reduce the sweltering heat of
ignorance, falsehood, injustice, and indiscipline. In a world where dharma is
being insulted and denied at every turn, peace and tolerance are the roads
through which one can save oneself. This is the sum and substance of what I
have to tell you and what you have to cultivate. In every act, have tolerance,
patience, mutual help. In the family, cultivate patience and mutual respect; in
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 126Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 26 - The World, My Mansion
 the community, have dharma and justice; in the community of peoples, have
the ideal of peace. The body is said to be the tabernacle of God; the world is
the body of God. A pinprick on the toe is immediately recognised as an injury
to the self because the toe is part of the self-same body. So too, suffering in
one corner of the world is as much the concern of the Lord as suffering in any
other. When Andhra State was formed, someone told Me that I had been
taken out of the Madras State and made an Andhra! I told him that the whole
world was My Mansion and that Madras and Andhra were rooms in that
Mansion! The world is a temple, the temple of the Lord, His body where He
resides. When I was coming by car to this place, I passed through several
streets and I found several halls decorated, because they were having
religious discourses there, and readings and expositions of sacred texts and
scriptures. Crowds of listeners had gathered in each place; there was no lack
of enthusiasm for associations and group singing. Yet, atheism is rampant,
and the number of people who deny God and decry Godward-bound aspirants
is increasing. Why? Because eating the food does not by itself guarantee
digestion. Practice of even a thousandth part of what one has read or heard
can alone help in giving peace and joy.
 You are here to fulfill God's purpose
What is wanted now is effort, courage, and faith. In effort, you must follow a
regulated routine learnt from some adept in the field. For courage, you must
feel your own importance for your uplift; never call yourself a sinner born in
sin, bred in sin, and engaged in sin. No; that kind of self-condemnation ill
becomes a child of God. In every one of you, God is the moving spirit, the
very Soul; how then can you be evil when you are here to fulfill God's
purpose, according to his Will, His plan, His law? He has endowed you with
many faculties so that you may seek Him and reach Him. You are not,
therefore, a helpless neglected individual undergoing a sentence of death.
You are an embodiment of Bliss, born to a rich heritage, which is yours for the
asking. Only you do not ask. Have faith in your destiny and work gladly and
steadily to attain it. Devotion (bhakthi) is simply the attachment (rakthi)
toward Bhagavan (God), affection toward the Supreme. One need not fly
away from hearth and home to cultivate it. If the seed is planted far away
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 127Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 26 - The World, My Mansion
 from the parent tree, does it become any different? Boil it and then of course
it will not grow again and burden the world. Similarly, boil your instincts and
impulses and scorch the sensory cravings that enslave you. That brings you
nearer to God, wherever you may be.
 Both good and bad emanate from the same mind
From the Ocean of milk when it was churned by the celestial beings and
demons, there emanated the cow of plenty (kamadhenu), the tree that grants
all wishes (kalpataru), the Goddess of Wealth, the four-tusked elephant of
Indra, and also the deadliest of poisons (halahala). Similarly, the mind of man
is churned by the forces of good and evil every day, and there emanates from
the same mind both good and bad. The bad comes because the mind flows
toward sensory pleasures and is lost in the swamps of greed and envy, of lust
and pride. When the lion awakes from sleep and roars, all the tiny animals
that held sway till then take to their heels. So too, when you awake and
repeat the Om (Pranava) mantra, all the paltry animal instincts that strutted
about in the darkness will flee. In your own heart you have the entity that is
beyond time and space, and if you go on contacting it by the Pranava or by
any other symbol, the wild thoughts and impulses will not dare to approach
you. If you have the Grace of God, no planet can harm you; maleficent
influences even from the most powerful combination of planets with which
the astrologers terrify you will disappear in a trice. In order to get that Grace,
there are two prescriptions: speak lovingly, as far as the world is concerned,
and speak the truth, as far as the next world is concerned. Love (prema) is
the weapon, and enquiry is the wheel that must be revolved perpetually to
get the light of prema . Until prema emerges, you have to be in the darkness
of hatred, where even the slightest movement creates fear and suspicion.
 Charge the battery of your spiritual discipline continuously
Never yield to indolence or despair. Suffer loss and grief gladly, for they help
to toughen your personality. The diamond is found amidst rocks; you will have
to blast through the vein to get gold. Follow the strict regimen that the doctor
enforces in order to make the medicine yield the best result. The battery of
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 128Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 26 - The World, My Mansion
 your "car" is charged when you come to Puttaparthi or when you go to some
other holy place. Or at least that should be the aim of pilgrimage. Charge the
battery of your spiritual effort and then, after you return home, do not keep
the car idle. If you do, the battery will run down; take the car around and keep
it going; then the battery will charge itself. So also, if you do not continue the
holy company, the good attitude, bhajans , and remembering God's Name, all
this charging becomes a waste. I have not come for propaganda or publicity
or gaining disciples or devotees. I am yours and you are Mine. Where then is
the need for publicity? I give not lectures but mixtures for your mental health
and moral re-invigoration. So take My words as medicine necessary for your
health.
 
Man did not come here to sleep and eat; he came to manifest, by disciplined
processes, the Divine in him. That is why he is called vyakthi (individual), he
who makes vyaktha (clear) the sakthi (power) that is in him - the divine
energy that motivates him. For this purpose he has come endowed with this
body and the intelligence needed to control it and divert it to useful
channels of activity. You must achieve this by steady pursuit of morality and
good deeds. 
- Sri Sathya Sai Baba
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 129Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 27 - The Underlying Truths
 27. The Underlying Truths
Date: 10 July 1959  / Location:  Bengaluru  / Occasion:  Akhanda bhajans
 
This life, which begins with a wail, must end with a smile. When you were a
little baby, everyone around you smiled, though you kept on wailing. But
when you die all around you must weep at the loss, and you should smile in
peace and quiet resignation. The pleasures from sensual enjoyment
(bhoganandam) must finally be converted into happiness from divine union
(yoganandam); the pleasures of the senses must gradually be left behind, and
you must develop a taste for the higher and more lasting pleasure derivable
from the springs of your own personality. For divine union, devotion to God is
the main thing, the head and the crown; peace and happiness are the other
essentials. The fire of sorrow and joy burns when the fuel of impressions left
on the mind by actions of past lives (vasanas) is fed into the furnace of the
mind. Take away the fuel, and the fire dies out. Take away the vasanas , and
you become your own master. This is done in yoga by various physiological
and psychological exercises. But devotion is the easier means for this end.
Remembering God's Name is enough; it is said that the name Sitarama (Sita's
Name) sufficed in the Thretha Yuga (Era), the name Radheshyama (Krishna)
sufficed in the Dwapara Yuga , and in the present Kali Yuga , I tell you, all
divine Names have that capacity.
 De-individualisation is moksha
When you recite Radheshyama , dwell on the significance of the Name; the
deeper mysteries of the word must be present before the mind's eye. Then,
remembrance of the Name will yield quicker results. Radha is not an
individual. It symbolises Dha-ra meaning Earth, the creation. Krishna or
Shyama is the Creator, the Active Principle: the Chith (Awareness), the
Purusha (Supreme Being). Sakthi (Supreme Energy) is the Supreme Atma ;
the individual is the individual soul; the Ocean is the Supreme Energy and the
Wave is the individual. All the taste and all the forces and roar of the wave
are derived from the ocean, and they disappear into the ocean itself. The
disappearance of the wave form and the wave name is called liberation
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 130Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 27 - The Underlying Truths
 (moksha): that is, merging of the wave in the ocean from which it seemed to
differ. De-individualisation is, in other words, liberation. When you do bhajans
and sing the Names of God, you should contemplate on such underlying
truths. The verse, "Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama Hare Hare; Hare
Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna Hare Hare ," has sixteen words, and
each of the sixteen signifies a virtue that has to be cultivated along with that
bhajan . (Here Baba recited a Telugu song composed by Him on the spot,
which indicated the sixteen qualities to be developed by a spiritual person).
 Sixteen qualities to be developed
A spiritual seeker should be:
1.full of devotion,
2.prepared to enjoy suffering,
3.free from the attachment to the transitory,
4.eager to serve the Lord,
5.of correct conduct,
6.charitable,
7.having an unsullied reputation,
8.with no blemish on his character,
9.fully content,
10.endowed with good qualities,
11.equipped with all the virtues,
12.equipped with the fruits of learning,
13.ripe in wisdom,
14.self-controlled,
15.adorned with commendable social traits,
16.full of humility and fully surrendered to God. [In Sanskrit, a spiritual
seeker must be
17.a bhaktha ,
18.a thapoyuktha ,
19.a samsara muktha ,
20.a padasaktha of the Lord,
21.a vihitha ,
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 131Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 27 - The Underlying Truths
 22.a danasahitha ,
23.yaso-mahitha ,
24.a kalmasha rahitha ,
25.a purna,
26.a gunagana ,
27.an utthirana ,
28.a vidya-vikirna ,
29.a jnana visthirana ,
30.swantha ,
31.a sadhguna krantha ,
32.a vinaya vishrantha , and finally, a padaswantha of the Lord
If he has these virtues (here Baba quoted the last line of the song he had just
composed), "He is I, I am He. (Vade nenoudhu, nene vadoudu)." Or, at least
one must pray, with verbal repetition of each word, for the inner growth of
each of these attainments, which will take one nearer the goal. Yes, you must
struggle. You cannot go to the top without an effort. Have faith in ultimate
victory, and gather courage and faith from wherever you can get them. Do
not have contact with persons who sow the seeds of fear or doubt. Treasure
all the confidence that you get here, foster it and guard it carefully. Do not let
it slip from your grasp the moment you get beyond this gate. The seedlings
should be well cared for, watered, manured, and protected from insect pests.
Can you pass an examination without studying the texts? But that is what you
hope to do! You must liberate yourself from attachment to fleeting things and
grow strong and be above temptation.
 Never discuss spiritual standards of others
The fish are happy because they are immersed in water; when thrown out of
the water, they struggle and suffer mortal pain. So too, one is happy when he
is immersed in love, peace, and truth (prema , santhi , and sathya); those are
the components of the water that gives life; when one is thrown out of the
water, one also suffers and feels terribly miserable. Life is "being" thrown out
of the water; spiritual discipline is the struggle to leap back into the life-giving
element. For success in this struggle, do not depend upon another; depend
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 132Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 27 - The Underlying Truths
 upon yourself and on the Grace of God. Remember that Divinity (Rama) and
worldly desire (kama) cannot be together; where Rama is, kama cannot
thrive; where kama is, how can Rama enter? Every person must have, as a
single stream (dhara), worship (arad) as the basis (a-dhara); that is the
easiest means of winning Shyama (Krishna, the Creator). When you carry on
such effort unbroken, the Lord Himself will come as your Guide. When
Madhurakavi was doing penance, he saw a big pillar of light in front of him
reaching up to the sky, and he saw Dakshinamurthy in that light. Then the
pillar moved on and on so that he could follow it, and at last, the light led him
on to Nammalwar, who agreed to be his guru! The guru later made him
realise the Reality. Vemana and Thyagaraja reached the heights of spiritual
experience through the Grace of the Lord and the encouragement they
derived from His Appearance. Pray to Him and He reveals Himself. He is the
yarn in the cloth, the gold in this seeming variety of jewelry; he is the mud in
all this pottery; he is that water that sustains all these waves. Once you have
realised this, you will be filled with love and respect for all, for all are the
same Form as the Lord Himself. Do not cynically talk about the spiritual
aspirants. What do you know of the mood of a devotee, that you so easily
pass judgement thereon and label him as insane or out of his mind? Never
discuss the spiritual standards reached by others; persevere in your own
path. "Be moderate in talk, in sleep, in food (yukthahara viharasya)."
 Remembrance of the Name is the best antidote for all ills
Never be ashamed to sing the name of God or to sing bhajans . Be proud that
you get the chance, be glad that your tongue is put to the best use. When the
artist sees a stone, he sees immediately the form of beauty hidden in that
stone imprisoned in it; and he will not get peace of mind until he releases that
form from the clutches of the stone. Do not see the stone as stone, see the
God in it, the basic reality underlying it. Vemana did not visit any temple for
years; for years he laughed at those who considered that the image was a
symbol of Divinity. But when his daughter died, he was one day holding her
picture in his hand weeping over the loss. Then the idea suddenly struck him
that if the picture could cause sorrow in him and bring tears, the image could
also evoke joy and bring tears to those who know the beauty and the glory of
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 133Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 27 - The Underlying Truths
 the Lord. The image was just a reminder of the Presence of the Lord
everywhere and in everything. The Lord is the sun, and when His rays fall
upon your heart, unimpeded by the clouds of egoism, the lotus bud blooms
and the petals unfold. Remember, only buds that are ready will bloom; the
rest have to wait patiently. Meanwhile, carry on with the companionship of
the Name of the Lord; remembering the Name is the best antidote for all ills.
 
In order to promote harmony, the first rule you must follow is control of the
tongue. Do not give all your thoughts immediate expression. Select, ponder,
and then, speak out. Speak softly, sweetly, without malice in your heart;
speak as if you are addressing the Sai who resides in everyone. Use the
tongue to recite the Name of the Lord; use the feet to go on pure and holy
errands; use the heart to contain pure thoughts and feelings. 
- Sri Sathya Sai Baba
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 134Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 28 - The Best Tonic
 28. The Best Tonic
Date: 21 September 1960  / Location:  Prasanthi Nilayam  / Occasion:  Sathya Sai Hospital
 
The greatest disease (or absence of ease) is the absence of peace. When the
mind gets peace, the body also will have health. So, everyone who craves for
good health must pay attention to the emotions, feelings, and motives that
animate the individual. Just as you give clothes for a wash, you have to wash
the mind free from dirt again and again; otherwise, if dirt accumulates and
you form a "habit", it is difficult for the dhobi (person who washes the clothes)
as well as harmful to the clothes. It should be a daily process; you should see
that no dirt settles upon the mind. That is to say, you should move about in
such company that dirt is avoided. Falsehood, injustice, indiscipline, cruelty,
hate - these form the dirt. Truth, righteousness, peace, love (sathya , dharma
, santhi , prema ) - these form the clean elements. If you inhale the pure air of
these latter, your mind will be free from evil bacilli and you will be mentally
sturdy and physically strong. As Vivekananda used to say, you should have
nerves of steel and muscles of iron. That is to say, you should have hope and
joy and elation as an unshakable resolution, not despair and dejection.
 What is studied is not put into practice
Your heart should be like glass, with the spiritual light inside illuminating the
world outside, with the world outside reacting on the inner urges and making
them lean toward service, sympathy, and mutual help. Now, people read and
study all kinds of unintelligible Vedantic texts and struggle with
commentaries and notes and translations to grasp their sense. It is being
poured down their throats, but the portion does not get down to soften the
heart. It is not translated into practice. The truths of the Vedanta are put on
for public exhibition, as in a drama, where appropriate dresses are worn on
the stage but taken off when the actor moves off the stage. They do not
adhere to them all the time to derive the Bliss of the Soul (Atmananda ),
which they can give. It is chiefly a matter of careful, well-timed, regulated
discipline; it cannot be got by spurts and skips; it has to be climbed step by
step, each step being used as a foothold for the next. There is no systematic
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 135Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 28 - The Best Tonic
 living according to any known principle, now; this is true of the student, the
householder, the mistress, and the master of the house. Virtues have to be
cultivated in the home; each member sharing in the joy with the rest, each
one seeking for opportunities for helping others. This attitude has to be stuck
to, so that it may stay as character. How can a vessel kept with the mouth
downward get filled with water? It has to open up and receive the good
impulses. You have to learn each lesson by systematic study. Application and
effort alone will give success.
 Have faith in the Lord and His Grace
In all effort, if you trust in a Higher Power, which is ready to come to your
help, work is made easy. This comes out of devotion and reliance on the Lord,
the source of all Power. When you travel by train, you have only to purchase
the ticket, enter the proper train, and take a seat, leaving the rest to the
engine. Why should you carry the bed and trunk on your head? So too, put
your trust in the Lord and carry on to the best of your ability. Have faith in the
Lord and His Grace. Try to earn it by using the intelligence and the conscience
with which He has endowed you. You have all gathered here to celebrate the
completion of four years in the life of this Sathya Sai Hospital. So I want to tell
you that the best and the wisest thing is to see that you do not fall ill. The
doctor read out in the report that this year the number of out-patients as well
as the number of operations was greater than last year, as if that is a sign of
progress! But I do not think that speaks well of the people around and their
sense of values. The hospital should radiate preventive measures also and try
to educate the villagers in methods of avoiding illness. Develop self-reliance;
that is the best tonic. You have been born because you did not pass in certain
subjects; there is some balance of experience that you must acquire to
complete the course. If you get convinced that your true nature is the Atma ,
then you have finished the course and "passed".
 Cultivate prema toward all beings
For reaching that stage, you should start with the cultivation of the "feeling of
kinship with all beings" - sarvasamanabhava , as it is called. It is very difficult
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 136Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 28 - The Best Tonic
 to get, but that is the only way to see the Atma that is in all. For example, a
person with that sincerity of feeling (bhava ) will not be happy at the killing of
animals for food or even hunting them. Why should you seek the animal to its
den, lie in wait for it, and lay traps for it, so that you may derive pleasure by
killing it? Prema should be cultivated toward all beings so that you may see
the Innermost Self in all beings. The Atma is Omnipresent. Do not think it is
found only in persons belonging to certain castes or colours or creeds, or that
it is of a big size in fat people or of a brilliant nature in rich people. It is
consistently being, awareness, bliss absolute (sath , chith , ananda ) in every
being. Spiritual exercise has to go a long way to win this outlook. But you can
begin with little things. You can avoid causing annoyance to others, can't
you? Even if you are unable or unwilling to do service to others, at least, if
you desist from causing harm, that is meritorious service indeed! For
example, take the words you speak. I always say purification of words leads
to cleansing of the mind. That is why I insist on quiet talk, sweet talk, and
little talk; the pure and serene (sathwic ) talk - no anger, no heat, no hate.
Such talk will cause no quarrel, no blood pressure, and no factions. It will
promote mutual respect and love. Then again, do not cynically laugh at the
good that others do or at the spiritual exercises of others. Inquire, but do not
insult. Respect the sincerity of the other person; respect also elders and
people with more experience than you. In company, behave in a well-
mannered way, showering brotherhood and joy on all around you.
 Moderation in food is always to be welcomed
Strive for the happiness of the community and of the human race. Pray that
all people everywhere may have peace and plenty. Be eager to do good and
be good. This being a function connected with the Hospital, I must tell you
about certain other things also. By regulating your diet and avoiding certain
bad habits, you can preserve health. Moderate food and food of the pure
(sathwic ) type, will promote mental poise and also physical happiness.
Moderation in food is always to be welcomed. Many people consume more
than the necessary quantity of rich food, and such have to practise
moderation. So too, if you do not smoke, you escape a number of illnesses
that follow that passionate (rajasic ) practice. Any intoxicant or stimulant,
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 137Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 28 - The Best Tonic
 because it disturbs nature's even trend, is harmful. Moderation in food,
moderation in talk and in desires and pursuits, contentment with what little
can be got by honest labour, eagerness to serve others and to impart joy to
all - these are the most powerful of all the tonics and health-preserves known
to the science of health, the Sanathana Ayur-Veda , the Veda of the full life.
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 138Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 29 - Sathya Sai Gita (i)
 29. Sathya Sai Gita (i)
Date: 27 September 1960  / Location:  Prasanthi Nilayam
 
In the Sathya Sai Gita, which Thirumalachar read and explained just now, he
has given My name to the " Sathya (Truth)" that he has experienced. Persons
who have seen Me are many, but those who have understood My significance
are few. So too, those who have "seen" the Gita, that is to say, read it and
learned it by rote, are legion, but those who have grasped the sense are few.
Gita must be " thagi " (which is the reverse of Gita), that is to say, in Telugu,
"drunk" or imbibed! Then, you become a "thagi ", full of vairagyam - and you
are free from senseless attachment to the sensory world. Giving up things
that please and bind, that ensnare and enslave (i.e. give up raga) - that is
what is meant by dispassion (vairagyam). 
Another thing about the Gita is that it does not speak of the householder
stage of life. It deals with the fundamentals of living - not living in this
compartment or that but living as such, and the deepest problems of life. It
was repeated by one householder to another, so it does not prescribe the
recluse's "escape". That is the lesson, both in that Gita and this. 
  Many read the Gita but few benefit 
Gita means "song". Krishna sings at Brindavan with the flute, and He sings on
the battlefield too. In both places, the call is for the particular to merge with
the Infinite, the Universal. For Him, the place of cremation ( rudrabhumi ) as
well as the sanctified ground ( badrabhumi ) are the same; they are equally
placed for imparting spiritual instruction in the form in which the devotee
most likes it, namely, song. And imagine with what concentration Arjuna
heard it! His concentration was as steady as that of the cowherd girls who
listened to the Message of the Flute in Brindavan. Arjuna forgot the opposing
armies, his own hatreds and enthusiasm for war, and became immersed in
the teaching he secured. If you develop that one-pointedness in your own
particular "battlefields", you can assuredly also listen to the Gita - the
Bhagavad Gita or the Sai Gita or the Sathya Sai Gita - that is intended for
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 139Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 29 - Sathya Sai Gita (i)
 you. 
The Gita was spoken to remove the delusion caused by ignorance, and it
succeeded in removing it as far as Arjuna was concerned. Others, like Sanjaya
and Dhritharashtra, who also heard it did not benefit, because they were still
bound by their own particular brand of ignorance. Dhritharashtra was all the
while worried that the battle had not started yet and that his sons' enemies
had not been destroyed! So he did not benefit. 
Many read the Gita, but few benefit. You must have Arjuna's dispassion and
Arjuna's one-pointedness to derive profit from the Gita. A pure heart and firm
disposition of mind are essential. 
  Feeling of "I" and "mine" should go 
The confusion of Arjuna was the feeling of "I" and "Mine". All of a sudden, he
began to feel that he was the killer, that he would be responsible, and that
they were his teachers and elders and relations. This feeling of mine has to
go; the "I" has to be crossed, and all words, deeds, and thoughts have to be
dedicated to the Lord. The baby weeps as soon as it is born because the
individual being has no desire to get entangled in objective world once again.
It is unwilling to come into this veil of delusion (maya). Science describes it as
the process of breathing for the first time and the clearing of the air passage,
but why should it weep? The process can be started some other way, say,
shaking or shivering, is it not? 
The weeping child must later leave this world laughing, and the worth of life is
to be judged by the end. Love ( prema ) is the seed, and devotion is the
seedling, the sapling. Faith is the manure, company of the good is the rain,
the offering of the Self is the flower, and merging together the fruit. With that,
one must throw off this coil and become free. 
The Gita advises renunciation of action, that is to say, karma without
attachment to the fruit thereof. Some karmas have to be done as duties,
related to the status in worldly life, and if these are done in the proper spirit,
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 140Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 29 - Sathya Sai Gita (i)
 they will not bind at all. Do all karma as actors in a play, keeping your identity
separate and not attaching yourself too much to your role. Remember that
the whole thing is just a play, and the Lord has assigned to you a part. Act
well your part, and there all your duty ends. He designed the play, and He
enjoys it. 
  Take refuge in the innermost recesses of the heart 
Atma is the ocean, nature is just a wave of that vast ageless, boundless
ocean, and the individual soul is just a droplet of that wave. You cannot give
up the wave or the sea. You can only merge the name and form of the
droplet. Once you enter the depths of the sea, it is all calm, it is all peace;
agitation, noise, confusion - all are only on the outer layers. So also in the
innermost recesses of the heart, there is a reservoir of peace ( santhi ) where
you must take refuge. 
There are three types of people: the lethargic ( thamasic ), who are like iron
balls, impervious to any softening influence; the active ( rajasic ), who are like
cotton, absorbent, but not changing their own nature; and the pure ( sathwic ),
who melt as butter melts at the joy or grief of others or at the mention of the
divine plays of the Lord. The sathwic dive deep into the source and spring of
sympathy. 
Anger, envy, greed, and intolerance are all so many holes in the pot; the
waters of peace, contentment, happiness leak through the holes, and the pot
becomes empty. The pot has to be repaired and all leaks stopped, so that it
may be useful. 
It is when you are in a desperate situation that you call upon the Lord,
forgetting your pride and your egoism. The Pandavas were so full of misery in
a worldly sense that they always had an attitude of prayer. If I had given you
all the comforts and opportunities, you would not have come to Puttaparthi.
Trouble is the bait with which the fish is hauled out of the water. Kunthi asked
that Krishna should continue giving her and her sons all kinds of misery so
that He might grant them His Grace continuously. 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 141Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 29 - Sathya Sai Gita (i)
   Offer your egoism at the Lord's feet 
Thirumalachar called this attitude offering of the Self ( Atma-arpana ), but the
Atma is He Himself, so what do you mean by offering Him to Himself? What
you would offer at His Feet is your egoism! Offer all the pride, all the
separateness, all the delusion, all the attachment that the egoism has
proliferated into! That is the worship you have to do. Bring to Me all the evil in
you, and leave it here take from Me what I have, viz. love (prema). Develop
the capacity to see all as "moved and motivated by the One Supreme Reality
or Self". 
Examine every day what you do and with what motive; then you can yourself
pronounce judgement on your progress. Select only pure motives, pure
deeds. You forgot that you are the Atma, and now you remember that you are
the Atma. That is all the progress you have to achieve; it all looks so easy, but
it is one of the hardest of assignments. The ear is so near to the eye. but it
can never see it direct! 
There was a clown in a palace who always asked questions and was therefore
held to be a big nuisance. The king had to put up a board, "No questions," just
to escape him. But when the king was on his death bed, he called him near
and whispered, "I am going." The clown asked him hurriedly, "Shall I order the
royal chariot? The elephant with the howdah? The royal horse full
caparisoned? The palanquin? How far are you going? Which is the exact
place? How long will you camp there?" 
The clown was very wise. He knew the questions, though he did not know the
answers, and neither did the king. But you can pass examinations only if you
know the answers! 
  The Gita helps to control agitations of the mind 
The Gita prompts you to seek the answers and directs you to experience
them. It helps you to control the thoughts and the agitations of the mind; it
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 142Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 29 - Sathya Sai Gita (i)
 destroys delusion; it develops true knowledge; it makes you glimpse the
splendour of the Lord and confirms your faith. You say one moment, "Baba
does everything, I am but the instrument," and the next moment the same
tongue talks, "I did this; I did that. Swami did not do this for me." If you never
slip into wrong, you can be ever certain of His Grace. 
All hearts are His Property, it is all His Domain. But just as the aristocrat sits
only on a clean spot, though the entire area may be his, the Lord will install
Himself only if the heart is cleansed. The Lord has said, "Where my devotees
sing of Me, there I install Myself, Narada." I must tell you that you are luckier
than men of previous generations. The accumulated merit of many previous
births must have granted you this luck. You have got Me, and it is your duty
now to develop this relationship that you have achieved by sheer good
fortune. 
In four or five years time, you will see yogis and ascetics and sages crowding
here, and you may not have such chances of asking Me questions and getting
the answers, of approaching Me and directly speaking to Me. So do not be like
frogs around the lotus; be like the bees. Plantains and mangos are kept, while
yet green, in straw or dried grass or in a closed room so that the heat may
make them ripe and tasty. Meditation on God gives you too the right
temperature to ripen yourselves and become sweet and tasty. 
  Seven things to be fostered for world welfare 
Seven things have to be fostered for the welfare of the world: the cow, the
Brahman-ward or spiritual aspirant or Brahmana, the Vedas, chastity, truth,
non-attachment, and righteousness ( dharma ). All these are now fast
declining, and I have come to restore them to their pristine purity and
strength. Do not think that this Sathya Sai Gita was composed by some
devotee and that he reads it and explains it here. As he said, I am the
inspirer, and it is for your benefit that he has summarised My Teachings in
this way. It is said 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 143Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 29 - Sathya Sai Gita (i)
  
"The One Truth is pure and unshakable (Ekam Sathyam, vimalam,
achalam)."
Thirumalachar has collected it in his vessel, and he is giving it to you. 
Of course, no one can unravel the Mystery of the Lord. Even Viswamitra, who
came to Dasaratha asking for the two boys, extolling them as Divine
Incarnations, later forgot that fact and dared teach them mantras (sacred
formulas), as if they were just ordinary disciples! He was even proud that the
Lord who transformed Ahalya and released her from the curse was his
disciple. Pride is one of the worst sins in the spiritual field. If you feel
conceited that you are a devotee of Hari, He will " hari" (destroy, in Telugu)
you remember. Absolute surrender ( Saranagathi ) should be like the attitude
of Lakshmana. Rama said, "Take Sita and leave her in the forest." Implicit
obedience! There is no why! That is Lakshmana. That is saranagathi ; the rest
are deserving only of sharagathi   (the arrow of Rama). 
That is the genuine Gita, this lesson of saranagathi. Increase faith, walk in the
path of a dharma, get rid of delusion and ignorance, cleanse the agitations of
the mind, and know that He is the Atma and that you too are the Atma. 
 
Have a time-table for spiritual sustenance, just as you have now for physical
sustenance. A breakfast of pious repetition of Lord's name and meditation, a
lunch hour of ritual worship of the Lord, 'tea and snacks' of reading
scriptures or sacred books in the afternoon, and a light dinner of devotional
music in the early hours of the night. If you follow this regimen, you can
sleep soundly and wake up refreshed.
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 144Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 30 - Sathya Sai Gita (ii)
 30. Sathya Sai Gita (ii)
Date: 29 September 1960  / Location:  Prasanthi Nilayam
 
If you take Krishna to be a gopala (cowherd), a man of the world like others,
then for you he will be just a cowherd! You too climb only up to that stage.
You have to take it in the yogic sense that "go " in gopala means living being,
so gopala means "He who protects, guides, feeds, and fosters the living
beings"; that is to say, "He who is the protector and preserver of beings." You
will have noticed that Uddhava, who looked upon Krishna as his guru,
benefitted more than Arjuna, who looked upon Him as (a friend. If you have
faith that He is God, He will be God to you; if you dismiss Him as mere man,
He takes on that role and becomes useless for you. Search for Him with the
heart, not with the eye for externals. The superpower has to be sought in the
super-state itself, not in the lower states. Then, if you have the eyes that are
fit to see and the wisdom to understand, you will find Him. Various people
have various methods of worship as well as objects of worship. Vishnu,
Shambhu, Sharadha, Allah - are all different degrees of human understanding
of the One Unsolved Mystery, the Fathomless Infinite and Absolute. Do not
seek variety, seek unity. Do not enter into quarrels about higher and lower;
when the same person is honoured by different titles, why should you quarrel
over the superiority or inferiority of the title. They all fall short of His Total
Glory.
 Karma is needed to realise the Truth
Your attempt should be to attain and become the Eternal and the Truth).
Truth is that which is the same in the past, present, and future, the same in
the waking, dreaming, and deep sleep stages, and which is unaffected by
qualities of sloth, passion, and serenity. Again, the Name is greater than even
the Named, for the Named may disappear, but the Name will continue and
will evoke the Form of the Named. There is no need to exhaust yourselves in
the search for the Lord; He is there like butter in milk, like the chicken in the
egg, immanent in every atom of creation. He does not come from somewhere
or go somewhere else. He is there, here, everywhere. From the atom to the
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 145Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 30 - Sathya Sai Gita (ii)
 great, from the microcosm to the macrocosm, He is everything. To realise this
grand Truth, spiritual exercises or spiritual activity (karma) is needed. That is,
karmayoga , karma performed with this end: "karma done in an intelligent
manner (karmasu kousalam)." A millionaire may have various vehicles - cars,
coaches, etc. - in plenty. But for his health's sake, the doctor advises him to
walk a few miles every morning. Otherwise he will fall ill, the doctor says. So
also, for removal of the disease of ignorance, one has to do virtuous action
(dharma -directed karma). The oil in the lamp is the fat derived from the
actions of previous 'lives'. The stronger the flame, the brighter the light and
the sooner the oil is used up. Do vigorous karma , exhaust the effects of the
past, and be free from the weight hanging round your neck. There is more joy
in the doing of karma than in the fruit it may give; the pilgrimage is often
more pleasurable than the actual experience of the temple to which the
pilgrim went.
 Make spiritual effort as natural as breathing
It was mentioned in the Gita that you should not care for the fruit of your
action, but I say now that you may value the result of your actions to a limited
extent. That advice was given according to the conditions prevalent then and
the delusion that Arjuna suffered. Since it will increase your Bliss (Ananda)
and give greater strength to your spiritual practices, I say now that so far as
spiritual practices is concerned, you can do them with a keen eye on the
Ananda that you will ultimately derive. It was mentioned now by the Principal
of the Markandeya Sanskrit College that I was born like Janaka, as the result
of some balance of karma ! I have no balance of karma to work out! I am
unaffected by karma , as already mentioned in the Gita . The Supreme Power
puts on the cloak of deluding power (i.e. comes in human form) in order to
fulfill the purpose of contacting and protecting humanity. I have no desire,
and thus no binding karma . Only you have the desire, aim, and wish that
drag you along various paths. For Me, your Ananda is My Food, your elation is
the swing on which I sit, your activity is My Playground. There are three kinds
of karma : natural action, like breathing, which has to be done; action done
with intent, like the combination of wick and oil in the burning lamp; and
action done without intention to gain the fruit of consequences, where there
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 146Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 30 - Sathya Sai Gita (ii)
 is neither oil nor wick and so no burning at all. Breath control and yoga (divine
communion) must become as natural as breathing and so automatic; that is
the summum bonum of spiritual discipline, the state of innate spiritual
discipline.
 I make people mad about God
Learn from childhood the recitation of the Name and prayer and the practice
of silence. Let children contemplate the beauties and the magnificence of
God's handiwork and be filled with mystery and awe. Do not count and
calculate what the Puttaparthi Sai Baba gives. I do not give in order to attract
you to Me; I give only to fill you with Bliss (Ananda). Showering Ananda , that
is My task. I do not want you to extol Me; I shall be satisfied if you rely on Me.
The mysterious indescribable Super-power has come within reach. It will
never engage Itself in any task without fruit. I bring tears and I wipe tears,
someone has sung. Yes, I bring tears of joy into your eyes, and I wipe the
tears of grief. I am said to make people mad and also to cure madness. Yes, I
make them mad about God and about the spiritual discipline needed for that.
I cure the madness that makes people run frantically after fleeting pleasures
and fall into fits of joy and grief. Some persons have said in their ignorance
that I am divine sometimes and that I become human after that! They say I
alternate between Divinity and humanity. Do not believe this. I am always of
one reality only. The Lord will never undergo a fundamental change; only the
external form may change. The essence will be the same. There will not be
any decline in value, like becoming human for some time, etc. The Lord will
be characterised by unbounded Love (Prema) and unsullied sweetness. There
are two duties to be done by man; the one along the path of righteousness for
this world and the one along the path of Supreme Reality for eternal
liberation. The path of righteousness is the left hand, so it can be left. Why, it
will leave of itself after the fruit becomes ripe. That is why it is called "left"!
Leave it, and do not grieve over it. But hold on to the right, the path of
Supreme Reality, for it is "right" that you should do so.
 Never hate others or wish evil to them
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 147Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 30 - Sathya Sai Gita (ii)
 Finally, you must know how to use the chance that you have got in this life to
come in contact with the Lord. The lamp sheds illumination, but it can be
used for various purposes, good and bad; the Ganga is holy but its waters are
used for good as well as bad purposes. How you use this chance depends
upon your destiny and luck and the amount of Grace that you are able to win.
Develop faith; strengthen devotion; and everything will follow. Rama was the
representative of Truth (Sathya), Krishna of Love (Prema), Buddha of
Righteousness (Dharma). Now it is of all four: Truth, Righteousness, Peace
(Santhi), and Love. Sathya is the Dharma , Prema gives Santhi . I command
you: never hate others, wish evil to them, or talk ill of them. Then only can
you attain the natural form of peace. The Lord alone is aware of the Plan, for
His is the Plan! You see only a part of the play on the stage, so it is all very
confusing. When the entire story is unfolded, you will appreciate His Plan, not
until then; for that, you have to get behind the screen of deluding power
(maya) and contact the Director Himself. While you are an actor on the stage
reciting your role, you cannot grasp the inner meaning of the entire play,
which has the "world" as the stage and "ages" as the duration. If, by acting
your role well, you develop Love toward fellow actors, that is more important
than getting devotion for God. If you acquire peace, that is a more valuable
success than acquiring spiritual wisdom. For devotion is the seed of love and
spiritual wisdom is the seed of peace. At the least, devotees should behave as
if they are all of one family. Take hold of the chance so luckily available for
mutual cooperation in worship and spiritual discipline.
 All the powers I have are for you
You are My treasure, even if you deny Me. I am your treasure, even if you say
No. I shall be affectionate to you and attach Myself to you; I shall take all the
trouble to keep My property safe in My custody! That is to say, in the custody
of the Lord, by whichever name you may be calling upon Him. All the powers I
have are for you: I am just the store, keeping them ready to be given to you,
whenever you ask for them. I shall give Prema even if you do not ask, for it is
your right to share in it. Some complain that I did not give them this or that,
but that is because their vision is limited to the immediate future or the
present; whereas I know what is in store, so I have to safeguard them from
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 148Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 30 - Sathya Sai Gita (ii)
 greater grief. They even blame Me and heap abuses, but I will not give them
up. I am not influenced by anybody, remember. No one can change My course
or affect My conduct to the slightest extent. I am the Master over all. But let
Me tell you this. I speak harsh words and "punish" some persons because I
have Prema toward them and am eager to correct them and make them
better instruments. If they were not Mine, I would have given them up and not
cared to take any notice of their lapses. I have a right to chastise those who I
feel are Mine. I also know that they still value My Word and that they will feel
sad at My being displeased with them. It is due to your wayward mind that
you are easily wafted away from Me by some silly persons' irresponsible
words.
 Peace can be won only the hard way
I sometimes act as if I keep you at a distance; that is done to reform you
quicker. When a stretch of road is being repaired, I go by another detour and
do not use that bit of road for some time. The purpose is to let the repair
works proceed more quickly, so that I may use that road again. I have come
to set the world right, so I have to collect all those who are ill and treat them
in My "hospital", restore them to sanity, strength and wisdom, and send them
back to their stations in life. I must intensify your devotion, reinforce your
faith, and rebuild the foundations of your moral nature, so that you can
counter temptations with greater confidence. I have come across people who
recite a prayer and believe that they are bringing the world nearer to peace
with every occasion on which they pray. But peace can be won only the hard
way, by eliminating violence and greed from the hearts of individuals. There
are cases when the villager in Puttaparthi, on getting fever, tries all kinds of
quackery till it becomes too serious; then he runs madly for doctors and drugs
to Bukkapatnam and Anantapur and Chikabalapur and Veilore - until he is
forced to sell his land to pay off the loan! If only he had taken resort first to a
qualified doctor all this could have been avoided. So too, do not run after
gurus who are themselves suffering from faulty vision and householder's
troubles: do not beg from people who are themselves beggars. Avoid all pride
and competition between one another in the spiritual life. Let each one march
at his own pace; only the direction and the road have to be Godward.
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 149Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 30 - Sathya Sai Gita (ii)
  
The sages of ancient times divided karma into that which is, intentionally
done and that which is done without any intention to gain the consequence.
Follow the latter, and you will save yourselves from suffering. All other
activities like the earning of wealth, of reputation, of fame and publicity,
result in suffering. 
- Sri Sathya Sai Baba
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 150Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 31 - Sathya Sai Gita (iii)
 31. Sathya Sai Gita (iii)
Date: 29 September 1960  / Location:  Prasanthi Nilayam
 
Vidura once asked Krishna, "How did you take part in the killing of lakhs of
soldiers in the Kurukshetra battle? You could have avoided all that massacre
and saved yourselves a lot of bother by simply changing the mental attitudes
of the chief participants on the Kaurava side, Duryodhana, Dussasana,
Shakuni, and Karna." Krishna answered: "My dear man, I have given everyone
a sum of qualities and powers. I have also awarded each a certain amount of
freedom to utilise them as they feel best. It is by functioning in this manner
that each one can learn better. By toddling a few steps, the child's step
becomes more certain and firm. Experience is the best, though the hardest,
school. However much you may say that fire burns, unless you actually burn
your fingers, you will not believe or know what a burn is." So you have some
freedom of action. A cow tied by rope to a tree can roam around that length
as radius and eat the grass growing in that space. Even a question paper
given at the examination asks you to answer, "Any six questions!" You very
often say, "Oh, everything is Baba's will." Then why do you come and ask for
this or that or even wish or plan? You must use the intelligence and
imagination you have been allotted to the best purpose; then the giver will be
pleased to give more. On the other hand, if you misuse the intelligence and
turn the imagination against your master, the giver will naturally get incensed
and will punish you in order to teach you a lesson.
 Prema is essential in all forms of devotion
I have been repeating every time the same advice to you, and sometimes you
may even get the feeling that I have only a few things to say! Well, a mother
has to repeat the same directions to the child again and again until the child
learns and behaves accordingly. The Mothers of the Vedas and Gita repeat
the same truths again and again, in different contexts and imageries. That is
the sign of all mothers - an overwhelming desire to reform the children and to
direct them along the path of progress. Tirumulachar read the section on the
yoga of devotion today, and he spoke of the nine forms of devotion, which I
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 151Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 31 - Sathya Sai Gita (iii)
 generally talk about: hearing, singing, remembering the Lord's Name,
prostration, salutation, servitude, friendship, and Self-offering. In all these
forms, love (prema ) is the essential component; it is prema that thrills and
fills the mind with joy and hope. Pothana, Nandanar, Jayadeva, Gouranga,
Thukaram, Meera, Purandaradhasa, Thyagaraja, and others were thrilled so
much at the very thought of the Lord because they had prema in such a pure
and overpowering form. Some people may laugh at all this devotional singing
(bhajans ) and call it mere show and exhibition and recommend instead quiet
meditation in the silent recess of the shrine room. But coming out in company
and doing bhajans like this helps remove egoism. One is not afraid of jeering
nor ashamed to call out the Name of the Lord. One gets inspired by the
devotion of others; the company of men with kindred sentiments helps to
foster the tiny seedling from being scorched by the heat of derision. A person
will sweep the floor of their room with a broom when nobody is looking; but to
do the same act, considered infra dig , when people are looking on requires
some mastery over the ego.
 Do acts that are full of prema toward all
Prema is filial piety when directed toward the parents, companionship when it
flows toward friends, love when it is felt toward the partner, respect when it
moves one toward elders, and affection when it is drawn toward children.
Devotion affects your acts in three forms: you do some acts consciously in
order to demonstrate your love or give vent to the prema that animates you;
you do acts as dedicated offerings to enhance the glory of the Lord, in a spirit
of worshipful humility, as if you are laying at His feet all that you are and all
that you are capable of, and you do acts that are full of prema toward all as
part of your mere existence, automatically, without any tinge of self or whiff
of violence upsetting the perfume of the act. The dedicated act leads on to all
activity being dedication. The Bliss (Ananda) makes you feel that your effort
has been worthwhile. That is the end, the aim, the inspiration. How do you
give Me Ananda ? By taking to heart what I say and putting it into daily
practice. Deciding to move high but attracted by the low, you betray yourself.
Improve your character and conduct; when your feelings become cleansed
and your impulses pure, you can see My Form in its Reality. I shall tell you the
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 152Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 31 - Sathya Sai Gita (iii)
 thing in a nutshell: Make the intelligence that has to understand Me free from
crookedness; let it become straight and sharp.
 Our relationship is Atmic, not secular
I have now fallen into your grasp, the very Treasure that you have been
searching for, because our relationship is Atmic , not secular or trained. In all
other places, your are fleeced, for the relationship is based on the purse. In
some places, it is based on caste or scholarship or some other incidental trait;
here, it is the attachment that Narayana (God) has for nara (human), the
Ocean for the stream, the Universal for the particular. Here, everyone must
become unlimited, escaping from bonds that limit him. All can become He; no
one is outside the Love of the Lord. The eighteen-year old boy is asked by the
mother to go into the kitchen and place a plate before himself, serve himself
rice and curry, and eat. The mother is not callous or unkind; she knows the
capacity of the boy and treats him as he ought to be treated. She
accompanies another son to the kitchen and sits by his side and serves him
food. She seats a third son on her lap and feeds with many a song in order to
make the process pleasant for him. Do not think that the mother is partial.
No, she is only making use of her knowledge of the capacity of her children to
make them progress. That is the nature of maternal love.
 Some gurus hunt for moneyed disciples
Some gurus have so much love, even toward their pupils. When aspirants go
to them asking for guidance, they praise them to the skies, exaggerate their
attainments, and grant them titles(!), which are paraded by the unfortunate
victims. In this way, the disciples are burdened by additional handicaps to
spiritual advance. The gurus want money for various purposes, so they
always have an eye on the purses of the disciples. They try to draw out the
money by grants of titles or by public praise or by promise of public
recognition - all worldly baits, which are derogatory to the principle of non-
attachment that they teach and stand for. Let the gurus condemn
accumulation of wealth and blame them for the misuse they are making of it;
let them be unsparing in their condemnation; that is the sign of the guru who
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 153Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 31 - Sathya Sai Gita (iii)
 knows his mission. On the other hand, such gurus ignore and tolerate evil in
the would-be donors because they are afraid any condemnation will dry up
their source of income. Thus, they ruin the disciples by desisting from giving
them the drastic drug they need, urgently, for their spiritual health. It has
become a tragicomedy, this hunt for moneyed disciples who can be fleeced. It
has been developed by some ascetics into a fine art. The time has come to
expose and punish such noble souls, and that will be one task in the
establishment of righteousness for which I have come. The brokers that these
gurus have scattered over the country have also to be broken. Books,
pamphlets, meetings, speeches, talks - all these are no good. Everyone
desirous to know Me has to be asked to approach Me and experience Me. In
order to get an idea of a mountain, it is not enough if you show a stone and
say, "The mountain is a million times the size of this." You will have to see an
actual mountain, at least from a distance. The "beyond" is very
incomprehensible. Science is like the letter C, always with a gap in the
middle, with a gap that is unfilled. Religion alone has filled that gap, for it
knows the Reality that persists in the three stages, in the three tenses, and in
the three worlds. So, religion is the three O's - a full circle, which may enlarge
as you know more and more of the glory of the Lord but which is ever full and
complete. At the end of it all, we are at the beginning again. The miracle is
but the natural behaviour of the miraculous. That is why I favour you with the
experience now and then, so that you may get a glimpse of the Glory. I will be
in this mortal human form for 59 years more, and I shall certainly achieve the
purpose of this Avatar ; do not doubt it. I will take My own time to carry out
My Plan, as far as you are concerned. I cannot hurry because you are
hurrying. I may sometimes wait until I can achieve ten things at one stroke,
just as an engine is not used to haul one coach, but awaits until sufficient
haulage in proportion to its capacity is ready. But My Word will never fail; it
must happen as I will.
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 154Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 32 - Sathya Sai Gita (iv)
 32. Sathya Sai Gita (iv)
Date: 30 September 1960  / Location:  Prasanthi Nilayam
 
Today, Thirumalachar read and explained the section on the divine
communion through spiritual knowledge in the Sathya Sai Gita that he has
composed. No one can say what the real nature of creation is, or of Brahman
for that matter. Faced with a Universe that is fundamentally mysterious,
which he feels must be endless and beginningless, which he feels must be
infinite, the scientist has to accept it, though he cannot form a real picture of
that kind of Universe. The scientist also works on faith, that is to say,
believing in something that he cannot fully grasp or clearly infer or really
calculate. That Reality can be demarcated only by the criterion of "Not this."
Brahman is posited and described by a process of negation or elimination,
"not this, not this (nethi , nethi)". In this artificial world, all is an artificial
mixture of name and form, which are both artificial too. To get the conviction
that this created world is a mixture of truth and falsehood is very difficult
indeed. When your head knocks against a wall, it is difficult to believe that the
wall is half false, that its name and form are a fiction of the deluded
imagination and that its real truth is the basic Brahman!
 Seven chief characteristics of Bhagavan
But this spiritual wisdom everyone has to achieve some day or the other. It
can be got through devotion or karma (activity) or royal yoga . These three
are only different names for the process of churning the milk to get the butter
that is immanent in it. Once the butter has been got and rolled into a ball, it
can be kept separate and unimpaired in the liquid where it was all the time.
Similarly, the liberated person can continue in the world free from
attachment, once they have realised that they are of the same substance as
the Immanent Brahman. When that Brahman is seen through delusion
(maya), it appears as (endowed with qualities and is referred to as Lord or
Bhagavan. Bhagavan has seven chief characteristics: prosperity, glory,
wisdom, non-attachment, creation, preservation, and dissolution. Whoever
has these seven you can consider as having Divinity in Him. These seven are
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 155Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 32 - Sathya Sai Gita (iv)
 the unfailing characteristics of Avatars , of the Supreme Power, which persists
fully when it has apparently modified itself with deluding power. Wherever
these are found, you can identify Godhead. You are also of the same nature
as the Atma with Supreme Power, but, like the prince who has fallen into a
den of robbers and is growing up there, the Atma has not recognised its true
identity, that is all. Though he does not know, he is nevertheless a prince,
whether he is in the palace or in a forest or in the robber's cave. Very often,
the prince will have got intimations of his real status, a craving for the Bliss
(Ananda) that was his heritage, a call from his inner consciousness to escape
and become himself. That is the hunger of the soul, the thirst for lasting joy.
You are all like the man who has forgotten his name. The hunger of the mind
can be appeased only by the acquisition of spiritual wisdom.
 Give your mind strength-giving ideas and courage
The mind is like a watchman; it has to be kept fully under control by the
master. Besides, the watchman will let into the mansion only those who are
friendly to the master, is it not? So, only such thoughts and feelings as are
conducive to the welfare of the master should be tolerated by the mind. The
mind is the chief thing for man, but its role has to be slowly reduced, and it
should not be allowed to take full charge. Feed the mind not on wicked
desires and unworthy plans but give it strength-giving ideas and courage.
When the mind is eliminated, then spiritual wisdom shines forth in its full
glory. After the realisation that everything is basically and completely
Brahman (the experience of sarvam Brahmath-makam), life cannot be
sustained for more than 21 days. Such a person is no longer in this deluding
world, so they cannot have any desire or activity. Even food and drink
become meaningless. How can Brahman need Brahman and Brahman
recognise Brahman as food and Brahman as drink? All the nuts and bolts will
fall away; the heart will dry up and the body will collapse. Spiritual exercise is
just holding the mirror before the self; the mirror, if it is clean and polished,
reveals the Self - that is the Realisation of the Self. All have Atmic uniformity,
the truth of everyone is the same. The company of good men leads you to the
Lord, while the company of evil men leads you to the mire of the objective
world. How to judge good men from bad? Those engaged in penance,
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 156Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 32 - Sathya Sai Gita (iv)
 meditation, communion, and worship are good persons; those who do not like
these are to be avoided by aspirants who seek spiritual wisdom and want the
joy that comes when the small becomes the big, when the momentary joy
becomes momentously important, when the destitute person inherits vast
riches. The good person is soft and bends easily before elders, sages, and
spiritual aspirants. "Not mine (Na ma)" is the attitude of "prostration
(namaskara)"; it is really namamakara : the declaration that "all that I am and
have is due to your Grace."
 Eliminate all limiting factors by systematic process
Spend your time in company of good people. Brush up your brains by the
brush of discrimination. I will not ask you to give up your critical faculty.
Evaluate, discriminate, experience, and analyse your experience; then, if
convinced, accept. Devotion, yoga , spiritual wisdom - these are three doors
to the same Hall; some come this way, some that way, but all enter the same
Hall. The spiritually wise person sees everything as the divine substance, the
devotee sees everything as the play of God, the karma yogi sees everything
as the service of the Lord. It is all a question of aptitude and taste and the
stage of development of reason and emotion. As a result of spiritual wisdom,
Thirumalachar said, delusion (maya) goes, but delusion does not "come" and
delusion does not "go". When a light is brought into this hall, you say that
light has come and darkness has gone, but where has it gone? Put out the
light, it is dark! The darkness does not come from where it had gone,
suddenly, through the doors and fill the hall. It is there all the time. It did not
go. Only the hall was lit and light prevailed. So also, when the Grace of the
Lord is won, spiritual wisdom will prevail and the delusion of separateness is
powerless. How can that spiritual wisdom be earned? By a slow, systematic
process, eliminating all limiting factors: greed, lust, pride, envy, hate, and all
the snaky brood of possessive instincts and impulses; by the educative
influence of dharma , the body of rules laid down by the experience of
generations for the regulation of living; by study, rumination and practice; by
analysis of the experiences of the waking, dreaming, and sleeping stages; by
learning to be a witness of all this passing show without getting involved in its
tangles; by overcoming all trends that divide and differentiate.
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 157Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 32 - Sathya Sai Gita (iv)
  Vision of Oneness is the highest reward
Prahlada never called upon his father or mother, as children do, when he was
tortured; he did not appeal to the torturers to save him; he saw in those cruel
henchmen the Narayana (God) he adored. Everything, everybody, was
Narayana for him. How then could he feel pain or suffer injury? Non-dualism
in practice, the culmination of devotion, fully realised spiritual knowledge,
liberated him. The vision of this Oneness is the highest reward the non-dualist
seeks. All this is a dream, and you are all actors. Once in Puttaparthi, in a
village play, the role of Vali was assigned to a rich man's son and that of
Sugriva to a poor man's son. Vali protested that he would not die in the fight
with the poor man's son and insisted that Rama should befriend and kill
Sugriva instead! The show cannot be changed to suit your whims. When the
play says Vali should die and when he has been given that role, he should die
correctly just as He has decided. Who knows whether praise and blame are
not part of the play?
 The faults you find in others are in you
Ignorance of this truth is a serious fault, which has to be attended to in the
early stages alone. The doctor who cures that worldly disease prescribed
remedies that have to be strictly taken - not the entire quantity in one gulp,
nor neglect for months or years, but the drug as well as the regimen. Some
people say they have come to Puttaparthi ten or even fifteen times, as if
walking up to the hospital a dozen times is enough to cure them. Every time
they may also get a bottle of the necessary mixture, but if they do not drink it
as directed, what improvement can they register? Spiritually wise people will
not look upon Me as wearing this dress, yellow gown today or pink gown
tomorrow. They will penetrate to the Real Nature behind this Form and know
that this Body is but a dress worn for a purpose. The coming Avatar of this
Real Nature will have another dress. You get full spiritual wisdom by the
analysis of the knowledge of the Self. Unless you know yourself, you cannot
know Me. What you are now doing here is the path of action, what you are
uttering is the path of devotion, and what you are revolving in your mind is
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 158Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 32 - Sathya Sai Gita (iv)
 the path of spiritual knowledge. What you are experiencing at this particular
moment is Heaven. For you are now immersed in the joy of listening to My
words. You have no thought now of the several reasons that have brought
you here. If I finish My talk and go, you slide into the world of passing things
and fleeting desires, vacillating minds and doubting brains. Above all,
examine your own conduct and faith. See whether it is sincere and steady.
When you sit in the moving train, you find that the trees are moving fast,
along the line. Do not worry about the trees; see yourself, examine yourself;
and then you will find that it is you that is moving fast. So also, do not blame
others and point out their faults. The faults you will find are in you, and when
you correct yourself, the world too becomes correct! Spiritual wisdom is the
discrimination between what promotes one's progress and what retards. Be
your own guru, your own teacher; you have the lamp with you, light it and
march on without fear.
 God's Grace can destroy effects of past karma
Even reaching the stage when "All is Brahmam" is realised as an
understatement (because that statement postulates two entities: All and
Brahman, and the experience of Brahman alone, IS), you have to go a long
way. But do not be down-hearted. The entire encyclopedia is composed of the
twenty-six letters of the alphabet, and all scholarship begins with the mastery
of A and B and C and D. I am here, ready to help you from the first lesson to
the last. Do not be weighed down by sorrow that your karma from previous
births is against your progress. The accumulation of the effects of your past
karma is stored karma , to be worked out in later lives, and out of that store,
you have selected some karma for present consumption; if wisely used and
cooked, this latter karma can be made sweet, palatable, and health-giving.
Moreover, God's Grace can destroy the effects of past karma or modify its
rigour. Never doubt that. If the law of karma is so unbreakable, then why
recommend spiritual exercise, good living, and cultivation of virtue? Your
present karma will melt like mist before the Sun if you win the Grace of the
Lord! The Grace of the Lord is needed for the dawn of spiritual wisdom also.
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 159Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 32 - Sathya Sai Gita (iv)
  
The consequence of karma (activity) can be wiped out only through karma ,
as a thorn can be removed only by means of another. Do good karma to
assuage the pain of the bad karma that you have done and from which you
suffer now. The best and the simplest karma is repetition of the Name of the
Lord; be ever engaged in it. It will keep out evil tendencies and wicked
thoughts. It will help you radiate love all round you. 
- Sri Sathya Sai Baba
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 160Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 33 - Foundation For Education
 33. Foundation For Education
Date: 23 November 1960  / Location:  Prasanthi Nilayam  / Occasion:  Birthday - 35
 
Into this tiny hamlet ringed round by "pigmy hillocks" there has come from
the far-off Himalayan region the Governor of Uttar Pradesh, Dr. Burgula
Ramakrishna Rao, to lay the foundation stone of your school building! Really,
this should make at least one thing clear to you: if sincere spiritual exercise is
done, even the most difficult thing can be accomplished. I find the whole
village of Puttaparthi and even the surrounding villages are immersed in joy
today. I too am very happy, for it is not simply a building that will rise up on
this spot. It is a new era of prosperity and of progress. He lays the foundation
not merely for an educational institution but for education as well. He has not
only sacrificed much for the freedom of his country and earned the respect
and affection of the leaders of the land, but he is also a great scholar in many
languages, and he is an ardent believer in Sanathana Dharma (Eternal
Religion). To have the village school begun by him is indeed a very auspicious
event. You can be proud that Puttaparthi is a village that has become famous
from the Himalayas to Kanyakumari, as the Governor said now. But, as he
himself added, it is a great responsibility as well. I consider this function to be
the crown and glory of this year's Birthday Festival, for I see the faces of the
farmers before Me, beaming with a new hope and a new joy. The elders of
this village have at last realised what they have missed all these years due to
their own defects.
 Puttaparthi is revered with gratitude by millions
To secure pearls, one has to go far out into the sea and dive deep; simply
wading in the shallows and declaring that the pearl story is a myth is a sign of
foolishness. So too, the elders here wondered so long at all stories of My
miracle powers and could not make use of the splendid chances that lay at
their very doors. They saw only the light, but did not feel the warmth. That
itself proves that though they were physically so near, they were very distant
for all practical purposes. They could see the Splendour, the Glory, the
Effulgence, but they did not come near and share the Warmth of my Heart.
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 161Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 33 - Foundation For Education
 Entangled in the false and the fleeting, men lose the golden chance of
grasping the true and the lasting. They refuse to recognise the fruits that
grow on the branches of the tree in their own garden; they pluck it before it
becomes ripe and go about decrying it sour. Such is the fate of man; he has
always ignored God and pursued the paltry joys of pride and greed. As a
matter of fact, Puttaparthi is a name revered and remembered with gratitude
by millions today, and it will be treasured in history as an immortal name. No
other village has such fortune, but you have been slow to recognise this. For
twenty years now, efforts have been made to calm the waves of faction in
this village, years during which many other villages sought and won My Grace
and Blessings. On many occasions, devotees have pleaded with Me to move
out of this miasma and settle down in Bangalore or Madras or some such
town, or, if I preferred, some other quiet rural spot. But let Me tell you here
and now, this tree has to grow at the very spot where it sprouted; it will not
be transplanted; I shall not give up this place, no, not I. This place will be
transformed into Tirupati, and those who are little boys and girls today will
surely see it in all its magnificence.
 Three requisites essential for all advancement
Not only this village but every village is sick with animosities and petty
quarrels and vendettas. As the Governor said, many attempts have been
made during the last fifteen years to better the lot of the farmer, but the
result has been far below expectations and expense. For there is an absence
of three requisites essential for all advancement: courage, enthusiasm, and
joy. The very nature around is enough to instill awe and wonder, to impart
courage, to inspire enthusiasm, and to fill you with joy! It is a type of false
non-attachment to close the eye to all the beauty, all the plenty, all the mercy
that you receive from Mother Nature, and to mope in sorrow, bewailing your
lot. You should be thankful to the Lord for the chance given to you to serve
others and yourselves, to observe His Glory and His Grace, and you should
look upon all as brothers and sisters. If, instead, you poison your hearts with
hate and revel in quarrels, well, what is the great profit you have earned
thereby? Have you at least derived peace and content, following that course?
You have reaped only further hate and further waste. The surrounding
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 162Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 33 - Foundation For Education
 villages have gainfully made use of the help given by the government and
advanced in some ways, but here, you need not stretch your hands before
the government; you have a wish-fulfilling tree (Kalpavriksha ), ready to give
you all that you want! You have the Lord, who protects and promotes all. The
virtues of the people are the treasures of the State; remembering the Name
of the Lord is the root of all virtues.
 The royal road to ensure joy and peace
Narada, who was afflicted with conceit that there was no other who had
dedicated his very breath to the recital of the Name, was once humiliated to
find that a farmer who managed to repeat the Name three times in the course
of his overwhelming multitude of distressing preoccupations from cock-crow
to dusk was judged a greater devotee! Joy is your birthright; peace is your
inmost nature. The Lord is your staff and support. Do not discard It; do not be
led away from the path of faith by stories invented by malice and circulated
by spite. Take up the Name of God, any of his innumerable ones, any that
appeals to you most, and the Form appropriate to that Name, and start
repeating it from now on; that is the royal road to ensure joy and peace. That
will train you in the feeling of brotherhood and remove enmity toward
fellowmen. Many seeds are sown in the field by you. Some are eaten away by
ants, some are washed off by rains, some are picked by the birds, some are
destroyed by pests, but some sprout strong and sturdy. This little school will
grow into a sturdy high school, believe Me. You, on your part, must do
everything to uphold the honour and reputation of this village. When I went to
Nainital, right in the midst of the Himalayas, thousands of miles from here,
they welcomed Me with an Address written and printed in Hindi, and therein
they mentioned this village of Puttaparthi, which they called a sacred place!
Well, when people actually come here from the various quarters of the world,
let them see a virtuous community of God-fearing men and women, living in
peace and content.
 
The journey of every man is toward the cemetery; every day brings you
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 163Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 33 - Foundation For Education
 nearer to the moment of death. So, do not delay the duty you must carry out
for your own lasting good. Recognise that you are Siva (God) before you
become a sava (corpse); that will save you from further deaths.
- Sri Sathya Sai Baba
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 164Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 34 - The Click of the Camera
 34. The Click of the Camera
Date: 23 November 1960  / Location:  Prasanthi Nilayam  / Occasion:  Birthday - 35
 
WHAT Kuppa Bairagi Shasthri told you now about Atma and the desire of for
knowledge of the Supreme Soul) was very learned and useful, especially for
spiritual aspirants who have reached a certain stage of discipline and study.
But I know that most of it was beyond you. My task is to give you the stuff
that you need now, in a form that is both sweet and digestible. It is difficult to
grasp the idea of the Atma , about which Kuppa Bairagi Shasthri spoke, in
spite of all the quotations he gave from all the commentaries on the
Upanishads . Gold in all the jewels is the base and the substance, however
many forms and whatever shapes the jewels may have. To become a
particular jewel is to lose the universal nature or rather to limit it. To lose the
name and form of gold and become a jewel is to feel separate, to forget the
One. The Atma does not change, no one can transform it. Its nature is hidden
by various veils of ignorance, such as those that Thyagaraja prayed Lord
Venkatesha to pull apart, in the famous song, "Thera thiyaga radha ". The
veils are known as the mind,the intellect, etc. The jewel must know it is not, it
was not, it will not be oval or square or fiat or round, or anklet or necklace or
ring or bangle. It must yearn to know its real nature and become aware of the
basic truth, apart from the unreal appearance. When it becomes gold again,
or, rather when it ceases to think of itself as anything but gold, it can be said
to have attained Bliss.
 Love has to begin with a great yearning for Light
Just because you have taken residence in this body, you cannot call the body
'I'. When you sit here in this hall, you do not call the hall "I". You know you are
separate and that you are here only temporarily. When you move about in a
horse cart, you do not say that the cart is you, do you? You do not take the
cart inside when you step down from it on reaching home. So also, you have
to drop this body when you reach "home". The 'I' in you is the Supreme Being
Itself. 'I' is the tiny wavelet that plays with the wind for a moment, over the
deep waters of the sea. The wave gives you the impression that it is separate
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 165Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 34 - The Click of the Camera
 from the azure and timeless ocean below. But it is just an appearance, a
creation of the two ideas - Name and Form. Get rid of the two ideas, and the
wave disappears in the sea; its reality flashes upon you and you know. The
Supreme Being reveals Its Glory as Love (Prema) in humanity; prema appears
in various forms: attaching itself to riches or parents or children or one's life
mate or friends. All these are sparks of the same flame, and the Love of the
Universal is its highest expression. This prema cannot be cultivated by
reading guide books and learning the steps by rote. It has to begin with a
great yearning for the Light, an unbearable agony to escape from the
darkness and see Light, as in the prayer, "Thamaso ma jyothir gamaya ." The
yearning itself will draw down the Light. The Love will grow of itself and by its
slow and inevitable alchemy turn you into Gold. Prahlada was a demon, but
prema liberated him nevertheless. Jatayu was a bird, Druva but a toddler, the
cowherds of Brindavan were unlettered folk; yet, through that alchemy, they
all shone in the splendour of prema and knew the Source.
 The merit of actions will have its say at the time of death
Once you take on the Name of the Lord which is sweetness itself, it will
awaken all the sweetness latent in you; when you have tasted the joy, you
can never for a moment exist without that sustenance. It becomes as
essential as air for the lungs. You may say, listening to some mythological
tales, that it is quite enough if the name of the Lord is remembered, however
casually, at the very last moment of life! But it is a hard task to recall that
name if you have not practised it for years. In the surge of emotions and
thoughts that will invade you at the last moment, the Name of God will be
submerged unless you learn from now on to bring that Name to the top of the
consciousness, whenever you want it. A shop keeper once was inspired by
that tale of Ajamila. He decided to remember the Name with his last breath
by a short cut: he named his sons after the various Avatars (divine
incarnations), for he knew that he was bound to call them when he was about
to die. The moment came at last, and, as expected, he called all his sons by
name, one by one. There were six of them, so he called the Lord by proxy six
times in all. The boys came and stood round his cot, and, as he surveyed the
group, the thought that came to the man's mind, just when he was about to
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 166Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 34 - The Click of the Camera
 die was, "Alas! they have all come away; who will look after the shop now?"
You see, his shop was his very breath all through life, and he could not switch
it on to God at short notice. The merit of actions will have its say, whatever
you may wish.
 Without faith, no progress is possible
It is no mean achievement to get the Name of the Lord on one's tongue at the
last moment. It needs the practice of many years, based on a deep-seated
faith. It needs a strong character, without hatred or malice, for the thought of
God cannot survive in a climate of pride and greed. And how do you know
which moment is the last? Yama, the God of Death, does not give notice of his
arrival to take hold of you. He is like the man with the camera taking
snapshots; he does not warn, "Ready? I am clicking." If you wish your portrait
to hang on the walls of Heaven, it must be attractive; your stance, your pose,
your smile must all be nice, is it not? So it is best to be ready for the click
night and day, with the name ever tripping on the tongue and the glory
always radiant in the mind. Then, whenever shot, your photo will be fine.
What is most needed is the cultivation of virtue, fear of sin, and fear of wrong.
How do you decide that an act or a thought is sinful or wrong? It has to be
done on the basis of the scriptures and of the Voice within. Without faith, no
progress is possible, even in the material world. Science considers the seen
as the final proof; but how far can you trust the seen? You respect a person
not on the basis of his dress or hairstyle, which are seen, but on the basis of
their character and attainments, which are invisible. You suffer now because
all your attachment is toward nature and all your non-attachment is toward
Purusha - God! This has to be reversed! You must cultivate non-attachment
toward nature and attachment to the Lord.
 All joy is derived from the form-full aspect of God
I am reminded now of the story of Shankara Bhatta. He was a great spiritual
aspirant, intent on remembrance of God's Name and meditation to such an
extent that he was reduced to skin and bone. He worshipped Goddess
Saraswathi (the Goddess of Learning), which is the key to open the doors of
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 167Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 34 - The Click of the Camera
 liberation (mukthi). Goddess Lakshmi (the Goddess of Wealth) saw his sad
plight and was moved with great pity. She chided Saraswathi for denying Her
votary even the common joys of life and Herself hid in his leaky hut to pour
on him Her Grace. She offered him plenty and prosperity, fame and fortune.
She derided Saraswathi for neglecting to award comfort and joy on Her
hapless servant. But Shankara Bhatta turned a deaf ear to Her allurements;
he said, politely but firmly, "No, Saraswathi has blessed me with the most
precious wealth, the gift of knowledge that liberates me. I do not crave Your
Grace. Please remove yourself from my presence." There is nothing so grand
and sublime as the Lord in whom you find refuge. Call on Him by any Name or
speak of Him as the Nameless one. It is both with Form and Formless. The
ocean takes the form of the vessel that contains a part of it. When that is
done, the Formless takes Form; the Absolute is reduced to the Particular. You
will find out, however, that all the joy is derived from the Form-full aspect of
God; the Formless causes no joy or grief; it is beyond all duality. Jewels give
joy, not gold. You can experience the Name, you can imbibe the Form; you
can take them to heart and dwell upon them and fill yourself with the joy that
they evoke. That is why Jayadheva, Gouranga, Ramakrishna, and others
wished to remain ants, tasting sugar rather than becoming sugar itself. The
Name is like the seed, implanted in your heart; when the shower of His Grace
falls upon it, it sprouts into a lovely tree. All trees that sprout from the Names
of the Lord are equally lovely and shady. If you have Krishna-nama , the
vision that you win and the form that you evoke is that of Krishna; if you have
Rama-nama , it is the Rama-form that sprouts.
 Do not allow your mind to waver due to doubts
Leelashukha had the Name of Krishna embedded in the well-ploughed field of
his heart, so the Lord appeared before him with a peacock feather, a flute,
and a charming mischievous smile! He fulfills your innermost aspiration in a
flash if it is compelling enough. Only you should not allow your mind to waver
due to doubt or disappointment. Leave all to Him and be at ease; it is the man
with no faith that is tossed about on the sea, like a ship caught in a storm
with neither rudder nor anchor. The devotee bears the ups and downs of life,
keeping the balance of the mind even. You sometimes talk as if the devotee
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 168Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 34 - The Click of the Camera
 leads a life beset with hardships and sorrows and that one who does not bend
before a Higher Power is care-free and prosperous; but this is a totally wrong
idea. The devotee sails on an even keel; he has inner peace, a spring of joy,
which sustains and keeps the devotee together. Bairagi Shasthri said that this
is an auspicious day for you because this is My Birthday; but let Me tell you, I
have many Birthdays like this. The auspicious day for you is the day on which
your mind is cleansed - not the day on which I took this human form. I am
ever new and ever ancient, ever nuthana (modern) and ever sanathana
(ancient). I come always for the sake of reviving dharma , for tending the
virtuous and ensuring them conditions congenial for progress. Some doubters
might ask, "Can the Supreme Atma assume human form?" Well, one can
derive ananda (bliss) only through the human form; we can receive
instruction, inspiration, illumination only through human language and human
communication.
 God bows to your will and carries your burden
I will never force you to take up a particular Name or Form of the Lord as your
wish. The Lord has a million Names and a million Forms, and He wants that
faith and attachment to be evoked in you by any one of them, as you recite
the Names or contemplate the Forms. That is why they have a string of 1008
Names for use to worship; the devotee might be drawn closer to the Lord
while any one Name is being repeated, however distracted or inat tentive
they might be during the rest of the list. Like the coldness of the atmosphere,
which freezes the water, the compelling agony of the devotee's heart
solidifies the Formless Absolute into the shape and the attitude that are
yearned for. "as felt, so fashioned (yadh bhavare, thath bhavathi)." He bows
to your will, He carries your burden provided you trust Him with it. Therefore,
act and feel and speak so that you get "joy here, joy hereafter, and joy
everlasting" - all three. I bless you all that you get more success in the
struggle.
 
You must tread the spiritual path with an uncontrollable urge to reach the
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 169Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 34 - The Click of the Camera
 Goal; you must cultivate the yearning for liberation from all this
encumbrance. Remember that you have to dwell in a house built on four
stout pillars: righteousness, wealth, desire, and liberation - righteousness
supporting wealth, and liberation being the only desire. However much you
may earn either wealth or strength, unless you tap the springs of bliss
(ananda) you cannot have peace and lasting content. 
- Sri Sathya Sai Baba
 
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 170Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 35 - The Dangers of Doubt
 35. The Dangers of Doubt
Date: 28 December 1960  / Location:  Chitravathi River Bed  / Occasion:  Vaikunta Ekadasi
 
Kasturi now spoke to you about the Puranic story of the churning of the ocean
to gain the nectar of immortality). He said that when the demi-gods were
overcome by conceit, delusion, and ignorance, the sages cursed them with
age, greyness, and senility; and they became easy victims for the demons.
So, to restore to them the lost splendour, the Lord suggested churning the
ocean and the winning of nectar of immortality. You have to take this story in
its symbolic sense. The mythological stories always deal in parables. Each
tale has a deeper meaning, something that is more valuable and useful than
what appears on the surface. This meaning is to be practised in daily life; they
are not stories told to while away the time. Indra insulted Dhurvasa because
he was blinded by the power of office, and the curse of the sage forced him to
rethink about his Reality, to discover his innate status. Then, he found that he
was nectar, of the same nature as the Supreme Reality Itself. In fact, he came
to know that he was the Supreme Brahman but moving about in the delusion
that he was Indra! The churning is the symbol of the spiritual exercises
needed to remove the veil of delusion, more specifically, the royal path of
integral spirituality. When the Power of Divinity declines and evil impulses
predominate, even the demi-gods fall; they lose their special privileges and
rights. Once falsehood enters into the character, you lose contact with Nectar.
He dies many deaths, he who is false, afraid of truth, blind to his own glorious
heritage of immortality.
 In their inner impulse, men are sub-human
Truth (sathya) is that which is eternal. Falsehood is poison; truth is nectar.
Truth alone confers splendour or Divinity. So, when the demi-gods fell prey to
pride and attachment to unreality, they had to churn their thoughts and
impulses, their feelings and emotions, their instincts and inspirations, and
bring out the cream of Truth. The two groups who pulled the churning rope
are the "forward leading influences and the backward pulling influences" - the
divine and the demonic urges. As I said, Indra insulted Dhurvasa and invited
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 171Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 35 - The Dangers of Doubt
 upon himself the anger of that sage because of the ignorance of his
fundamental reality, his ignorance, which plunged him in pride. What should
be done to restore him to sanity is to reteach him the Atmic (universal
spiritual) basis of all the pomp and pageantry of office, the evanescence that
is immanent in all created things. Today, though in outward appearance
people are human, in inner impulse they are sub-human or demonic; people
who have no charity or sacrifice in them are called demons. Demi-god and
demon are mixed in the human make-up, and now the demon rules the roost.
Therefore, man has lost his glory and his power and his splendour; he must
win them again by spiritual discipline. So make yourselves pure by incessant
striving.
 Man is but a flame of the eternal fire
The partaking of the nectar that I create is only the first step in this process
for you: it does not mean much if you do not take the second step and the
third and march on toward self-realisation. You must have faith in the
discipline laid down in Sanathana Dharma (Eternal Religion) and in the
ultimate divine basis of all creation. Get convinced that the world can give
you only fleeting joy and that grief is but the obverse of joy. Strive now, from
this very moment, for time is rushing like a swift torrent. Develop the joy that
will not decline, the joy that will ever be full. Be true to yourself. Be bold, be
sincere. The only reality is the twin bird on the tree: individual soul, which
tastes the fruits and suffers, and the Supreme Soul, which sits unmoved and
merely looks on. Mention was made now of the form of fascinating woman
and the way in which the demons were misled by the enticing charm of
outward form. Now, all this talk of the Consorts of the Lord, of Lakshmi,
Saraswathi, and Parvathi being the wives of the Trinity, are absolutely silly.
They reveal only the worldly living glasses that you wear, the projection of
your worldly fancies on the "heavenly families", the weaving of stories on the
human model for the satisfaction of human cravings. These names are only
convenient expressions for the Divine Power that is immanent in Godhead.
For example, Lakshmi is the personification of the Grace of Vishnu; that is
why she is said to dwell on His breast! So too, Parvathi is half the body of
Siva, inseparably incorporated in Him! The powers of Creation, Conservation,
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 172Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 35 - The Dangers of Doubt
 and Dissolution are coexistent and continuous in Godhead. You may ask how
the three can coexist. Well, look at electricity! The current can create,
conserve, as well as dissolve, all at the same time, and to the same extent.
These divine energies are similarly pictured as inseparably associated with
the three aspects of the Absolute. Man's duty is to achieve unity with the Siva
Power (Siva-Sakthi), for he is but a spark that has emanated from it; he is but
a flame of the Eternal Fire.
 Devotion must confer patience and fortitude
Enter upon that task of spiritual discipline from now on; that is the lesson you
must learn here. Otherwise, a pilgrimage leads only to the accumulation of
vessels - you buy vessels from wherever you go: from Rameshwaram,
Tirupati, Kasi, Haridhwar, Madhura, Kumbhakonam. That is the merit you get
from a pilgrimage, a room full of vessels. You come from long distances, incur
heavy expenses, suffer in the cold in the open, or lie in the shade of trees,
and wait for days, expecting the longed-for interview with Me; but in the end,
you return and dissipate the peace and happiness you derive from this place.
Devotion is something sweet, soothing, refreshing, and restoring. It must
confer patience and fortitude. The devotee will not be perturbed if another
gets an interview first or if another is given greater consideration. He is
humble and bides his time: he knows that there is a higher power that knows
more and that it is just and impartial. In the light of that knowledge, the
devotee will communicate his troubles and problems only to his Lord; he will
not humiliate himself by talking about them to all and sundry, for what can a
man, who is as helpless as himself, do to relieve him? It is only those who
have that implicit faith in God, who will deign to communicate only with the
Lord and none else, who deserve the nectar of immortality.
 Make remembrance of the name of God part of yourself
The gross body should be ever immersed in holy company; the subtle body,
that is, the thoughts and feelings, should be ever immersed in the
contemplation of the Glory of the Lord. That is the sign of the devotee. One
who shouts and swears and advertises one's worries to everyone and craves
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 173Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 35 - The Dangers of Doubt
 for sympathy, such a one can never be a devotee. Such men are miscalled
devotees. They make earnest men lose faith in Godly ways; earnest men feel
they are superior to these pseudo-devotees. And this is a fact. It is a great
responsibility to tread the Godward path. There is no sliding back, no halfway
stop, no tardy pace, no side lane on such a pilgrimage. It is always up and up,
right to the crest of the mountain. Though your responsibility is greater, take
it from Me, you are luckier than others. Do not deny with the tongue what you
have relished in the heart; do not bear false witness to your own felt
experience. Do not carp and talk cynically of the very thing you have revered
and adored when the company into which you fall start such raillery. It is said
that the devotee can get the Lord everywhere easily, but the Lord cannot get
a devotee so easily. Yes, it is difficult to secure a devotee who has that
unshaken faith, that attitude of complete self-surrender. Such an attitude can
come only by remembering God's Name - constant, sincere, and continuous,
as continuous as the act of breathing and felt to be as essential for life. That
is the silent recital of the Lord's name, penance, and meditation) for you all.
Remembrance of God's Name like this will immerse you ever in nectar, not
just a drop on your tongue.
 Spiritual discipline has to be followed from a tender age
Do you know how much I feel when I find that, in spite of My arrival and
teaching and spiritual instruction, you have not yet started this spiritual
discipline? You simply praise Me and strew compliments; that I am the
Treasure-house of Grace, the Ocean of Ananda , etc. Take up the Name and
dwell upon Its sweetness; imbibe It and roll It on your tongue, taste Its
essence, contemplate on Its magnificence, and make it a part of yourself and
grow strong in spiritual joy. That is what pleases Me. Do not wait until you are
past middle age to practise this spiritual exercise; I know of some parents
who drag away their sons who come to Me when still young; they tell them
that they can take up religious practices in their old age. These parents do
not know the extent of the loss. By some stroke of good luck, their children
get the chance of knowing about the right path for peace and contentment,
but the parents are angry that the sons do not find pleasure in the articles
that gave them pleasure! They feel there must be something wrong in the
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 174Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 35 - The Dangers of Doubt
 make-up of their sons; they tempt them to drink, to gamble, to exploit, to
hate - to imitate them, in short - and take them along with them to perdition.
But a straight plant means a straight tree; a bent plant can never grow into a
straight tree. Rotten, over-ripe, worm-eaten fruits are not fit to be offered to
God. Years of sin would have warped the character of a person beyond repair.
So the spiritual discipline has to be followed from a tender age.
 Doubt is a component of the demonic nature
Faith can grow only by long cultivation and careful attention. The old are
haunted by the demon of doubt. I know there are many here who are afflicted
by doubt. They think that I have hidden a vessel of nectar in a spot in the
sands previously fixed and known to Me only. That is why I now asked some
from among those people themselves to decide where we sit on these sands.
Kasturi suggested this morning that since the thousands who have come to
see the materialisation of nectar cannot get a close view on this flat riverbed,
a mound of sand be raised, whereon I can sit. I did not agree because I knew
these doubters would immediately infer that the nectar was hidden previously
under the mound that was heaped up on purpose! This doubt is truly a
component of the demonic nature, for it eats into the vitals of devotion. It
clips the wings of joy, it dampens enthusiasm, it tarnishes hope. Such a
person cannot attain the goal even at the end of a thousand births. When
doubt assails you, welcome the chance to see and experience and clear the
doubt. But do not later deny the very truth of which you were once convinced
and listen again to the voice of hate or foolishness. Do not put faith in the
words of men into whose hands you will not entrust your purse; as a matter of
fact, it is the words of such men that are now leading many astray. Really,
this is a pitiable state of things, is it not? Come to Me, eager to learn, to
progress, to see Yourself in Me, and I shall certainly welcome you and show
you the way. You will indeed be blessed. All scriptures, all texts, the Gita ,
which is the milk of all the Upanishadic Cows, are intended to instill this thirst
into you.
 Do not vacillate and change Name and Form
Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 175Sri Sathya Sai Speaks, Vol 1 (1953 - 60), Discourse 35 - The Dangers of Doubt
 The thirst has to be like that of the creeper for the tree trunk, of the magnet
for the iron, of the bee for the flower, of the waters for a fall, of the river for
the sea. The pangs of separation must gnaw the heart; the entire being must
yearn for union. Do not vacillate or change or try a series of Names and
Forms. That will only fritter away time and energy. Ceaseless contemplation
of the Lord will give ceaseless taste of nectar to you. If you do not follow this
path, you are doubly to blame, for you have contacted Me. The Form usually
creates doubts, for when only the Name is there, you can build around it all
your fancies, all that you want, to complete the picture. Do not be misled by
such doubts when the Form has come before you; make the moment useful,
the life worthwhile. (Finding that the vast gathering would not be able to see
the materialisation of the nectar if He did it while seated on the sands, Baba
first created a conch, "the vessel from which the amrith (nectar) will now
emanate," as He announced. Then He stood up in the centre of the crowd and
"poured" from that empty conch into a silver vessel a sparkling stream of
sweet and fragrant nectar, which he later distributed to every person who had
come.)
 
What you have heard and seen must be spoken out, without exaggeration or
abridgement; that is truth-speaking (sathya). Of course, when the mind is
controlled, the intelligence is sharpened and purified; you see only the One
everywhere, in everything, at all times; then that One becomes the only
truth, which you see, hear and speak of - for there is nothing else to see or
hear. 
- Sri Sathya Sai Baba
 
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)Index https://saispeaks.sathyasai.org/ 176